 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM ***




cover 




A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM

by William Shakespeare




Contents

ACT I
Scene I.
Athens. A room in the Palace of Theseus
Scene II.
The Same. A Room in a Cottage

ACT II
Scene I.
A wood near Athens
Scene II.
Another part of the wood

ACT III
Scene I.
The Wood.
Scene II.
Another part of the wood

ACT IV
Scene I.
The Wood
Scene II.
Athens. A Room in Quince’s House

ACT V
Scene I.
Athens. An Apartment in the Palace of Theseus




Dramatis Personæ


THESEUS, Duke of Athens
HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus
EGEUS, Father to Hermia
HERMIA, daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander
HELENA, in love with Demetrius
LYSANDER, in love with Hermia
DEMETRIUS, in love with Hermia
PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus

QUINCE, the Carpenter
SNUG, the Joiner
BOTTOM, the Weaver
FLUTE, the Bellows-mender
SNOUT, the Tinker
STARVELING, the Tailor

OBERON, King of the Fairies
TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies
PUCK, or ROBIN GOODFELLOW, a Fairy
PEASEBLOSSOM, Fairy
COBWEB, Fairy
MOTH, Fairy
MUSTARDSEED, Fairy

PYRAMUS, THISBE, WALL, MOONSHINE, LION; Characters in the Interlude
performed by the Clowns

Other Fairies attending their King and Queen
Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta

SCENE: Athens, and a wood not far from it




ACT I

SCENE I. Athens. A room in the Palace of Theseus


 Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate and Attendants.

THESEUS.
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
Another moon; but oh, methinks, how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,
Like to a step-dame or a dowager,
Long withering out a young man’s revenue.

HIPPOLYTA.
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.

THESEUS.
Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.

 [_Exit Philostrate._]

Hippolyta, I woo’d thee with my sword,
And won thy love doing thee injuries;
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.

 Enter Egeus, Hermia, Lysander and Demetrius.

EGEUS.
Happy be Theseus, our renownèd Duke!

THESEUS.
Thanks, good Egeus. What’s the news with thee?

EGEUS.
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.
Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke,
This man hath bewitch’d the bosom of my child.
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
And interchang’d love-tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
With feigning voice, verses of feigning love;
And stol’n the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats (messengers
Of strong prevailment in unharden’d youth)
With cunning hast thou filch’d my daughter’s heart,
Turn’d her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,
Be it so she will not here before your grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine I may dispose of her;
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.

THESEUS.
What say you, Hermia? Be advis’d, fair maid.
To you your father should be as a god;
One that compos’d your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure, or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

HERMIA.
So is Lysander.

THESEUS.
In himself he is.
But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice,
The other must be held the worthier.

HERMIA.
I would my father look’d but with my eyes.

THESEUS.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.

HERMIA.
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts:
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case,
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

THESEUS.
Either to die the death, or to abjure
For ever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether, if you yield not to your father’s choice,
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mew’d,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distill’d
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.

HERMIA.
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his lordship, whose unwishèd yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

THESEUS.
Take time to pause; and by the next new moon
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship,
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father’s will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana’s altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.

DEMETRIUS.
Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazèd title to my certain right.

LYSANDER.
You have her father’s love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia’s. Do you marry him.

EGEUS.
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him;
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.

LYSANDER.
I am, my lord, as well deriv’d as he,
As well possess’d; my love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly rank’d,
If not with vantage, as Demetrius’;
And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
I am belov’d of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I’ll avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.

THESEUS.
I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being over-full of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.—But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.—
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your father’s will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death, or to a vow of single life.
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?
Demetrius and Egeus, go along;
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial, and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

EGEUS.
With duty and desire we follow you.

 [_Exeunt all but Lysander and Hermia._]

LYSANDER.
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?

HERMIA.
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.

LYSANDER.
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood—

HERMIA.
O cross! Too high to be enthrall’d to low.

LYSANDER.
Or else misgraffèd in respect of years—

HERMIA.
O spite! Too old to be engag’d to young.

LYSANDER.
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends—

HERMIA.
O hell! to choose love by another’s eyes!

LYSANDER.
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say, ‘Behold!’
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
So quick bright things come to confusion.

HERMIA.
If then true lovers have ever cross’d,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience,
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancy’s followers.

LYSANDER.
A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night;
And in the wood, a league without the town
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.

HERMIA.
My good Lysander!
I swear to thee by Cupid’s strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus’ doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burn’d the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
(In number more than ever women spoke),
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.

LYSANDER.
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

 Enter Helena.

HERMIA.
God speed fair Helena! Whither away?

HELENA.
Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongue’s sweet air
More tuneable than lark to shepherd’s ear,
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O were favour so,
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest I’d give to be to you translated.
O, teach me how you look, and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius’ heart!

HERMIA.
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.

HELENA.
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!

HERMIA.
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

HELENA.
O that my prayers could such affection move!

HERMIA.
The more I hate, the more he follows me.

HELENA.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.

HERMIA.
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.

HELENA.
None but your beauty; would that fault were mine!

HERMIA.
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see,
Seem’d Athens as a paradise to me.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
That he hath turn’d a heaven into hell!

LYSANDER.
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:
Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the watery glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
(A time that lovers’ flights doth still conceal),
Through Athens’ gates have we devis’d to steal.

HERMIA.
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet,
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers’ food, till morrow deep midnight.

LYSANDER.
I will, my Hermia.

 [_Exit Hermia._]

Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!

 [_Exit Lysander._]

HELENA.
How happy some o’er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
He will not know what all but he do know.
And as he errs, doting on Hermia’s eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
And therefore is wing’d Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath love’s mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is love said to be a child,
Because in choice he is so oft beguil’d.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjur’d everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius look’d on Hermia’s eyne,
He hail’d down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolv’d, and showers of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her; and for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.

 [_Exit Helena._]


SCENE II. The Same. A Room in a Cottage

 Enter Quince, Snug, Bottom, Flute, Snout  and Starveling.

QUINCE.
Is all our company here?

BOTTOM.
You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the
scrip.

QUINCE.
Here is the scroll of every man’s name, which is thought fit through
all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke and Duchess, on
his wedding-day at night.

BOTTOM.
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on; then read the
names of the actors; and so grow to a point.

QUINCE.
Marry, our play is _The most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of
Pyramus and Thisbe_.

BOTTOM.
A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now, good Peter
Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters, spread
yourselves.

QUINCE.
Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.

BOTTOM.
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.

QUINCE.
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

BOTTOM.
What is Pyramus—a lover, or a tyrant?

QUINCE.
A lover, that kills himself most gallantly for love.

BOTTOM.
That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I do it, let
the audience look to their eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in
some measure. To the rest—yet my chief humour is for a tyrant. I could
play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split.

    The raging rocks
    And shivering shocks
    Shall break the locks
           Of prison gates,
    And Phibbus’ car
    Shall shine from far,
    And make and mar
           The foolish Fates.

This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is Ercles’ vein,
a tyrant’s vein; a lover is more condoling.

QUINCE.
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.

FLUTE.
Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE.
Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.

FLUTE.
What is Thisbe? A wandering knight?

QUINCE.
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

FLUTE.
Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a beard coming.

QUINCE.
That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small
as you will.

BOTTOM.
And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too. I’ll speak in a
monstrous little voice; ‘Thisne, Thisne!’—‘Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear!
thy Thisbe dear! and lady dear!’

QUINCE.
No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisbe.

BOTTOM.
Well, proceed.

QUINCE.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.

STARVELING.
Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE.
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s mother.
Tom Snout, the tinker.

SNOUT
Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE.
You, Pyramus’ father; myself, Thisbe’s father;
Snug, the joiner, you, the lion’s part. And, I hope here is a play
fitted.

SNUG
Have you the lion’s part written? Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I
am slow of study.

QUINCE.
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.

BOTTOM.
Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do any man’s heart
good to hear me. I will roar that I will make the Duke say ‘Let him
roar again, let him roar again.’

QUINCE.
If you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Duchess and the
ladies, that they would shriek; and that were enough to hang us all.

ALL
That would hang us every mother’s son.

BOTTOM.
I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their
wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. But I will
aggravate my voice so, that I will roar you as gently as any sucking
dove; I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.

QUINCE.
You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man; a
proper man as one shall see in a summer’s day; a most lovely
gentleman-like man. Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.

BOTTOM.
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?

QUINCE.
Why, what you will.

BOTTOM.
I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your
orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your
French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.

QUINCE.
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play
bare-faced. But, masters, here are your parts, and I am to entreat you,
request you, and desire you, to con them by tomorrow night; and meet me
in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight; there will
we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall be dogg’d with
company, and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of
properties, such as our play wants. I pray you fail me not.

BOTTOM.
We will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and
courageously. Take pains, be perfect; adieu.

QUINCE.
At the Duke’s oak we meet.

BOTTOM.
Enough. Hold, or cut bow-strings.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A wood near Athens


 Enter a Fairy at one door, and Puck at another.

PUCK.
How now, spirit! Whither wander you?

FAIRY
    Over hill, over dale,
        Thorough bush, thorough brier,
    Over park, over pale,
        Thorough flood, thorough fire,
    I do wander everywhere,
    Swifter than the moon’s sphere;
    And I serve the Fairy Queen,
    To dew her orbs upon the green.
    The cowslips tall her pensioners be,
    In their gold coats spots you see;
    Those be rubies, fairy favours,
    In those freckles live their savours.
I must go seek some dew-drops here,
And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I’ll be gone.
Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.

PUCK.
The King doth keep his revels here tonight;
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy, stol’n from an Indian king;
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild:
But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy,
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square; that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups, and hide them there.

FAIRY
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Call’d Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?

PUCK.
Thou speak’st aright;
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile,
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
And ‘tailor’ cries, and falls into a cough;
And then the whole quire hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.

FAIRY
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

 Enter Oberon at one door, with his Train, and Titania at another, with
 hers.

OBERON.
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.

TITANIA.
What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;
I have forsworn his bed and company.

OBERON.
Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?

TITANIA.
Then I must be thy lady; but I know
When thou hast stol’n away from fairyland,
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskin’d mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded; and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?

OBERON.
How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night
From Perigenia, whom he ravished?
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?

TITANIA.
These are the forgeries of jealousy:
And never, since the middle summer’s spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By pavèd fountain, or by rushy brook,
Or on the beachèd margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturb’d our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge, have suck’d up from the sea
Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretch’d his yoke in vain,
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attain’d a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drownèd field,
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
The nine-men’s-morris is fill’d up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blest.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;
And on old Hiems’ thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,
By their increase, now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.

OBERON.
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy
To be my henchman.

TITANIA.
Set your heart at rest;
The fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a vot’ress of my order,
And in the spicèd Indian air, by night,
Full often hath she gossip’d by my side;
And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands,
Marking th’ embarkèd traders on the flood,
When we have laugh’d to see the sails conceive,
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire),
Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
To fetch me trifles, and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.

OBERON.
How long within this wood intend you stay?

TITANIA.
Perchance till after Theseus’ wedding-day.
If you will patiently dance in our round,
And see our moonlight revels, go with us;
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.

OBERON.
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.

TITANIA.
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.

 [_Exit Titania with her Train._]

OBERON.
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.—
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb’rest
Since once I sat upon a promontory,
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maid’s music.

PUCK.
I remember.

OBERON.
That very time I saw, (but thou couldst not),
Flying between the cold moon and the earth,
Cupid all arm’d: a certain aim he took
At a fair vestal, thronèd by the west,
And loos’d his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft
Quench’d in the chaste beams of the watery moon;
And the imperial votress passed on,
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet mark’d I where the bolt of Cupid fell:
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before milk-white, now purple with love’s wound,
And maidens call it love-in-idleness.
Fetch me that flower, the herb I showed thee once:
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

PUCK.
I’ll put a girdle round about the earth
In forty minutes.

 [_Exit Puck._]

OBERON.
Having once this juice,
I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep,
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes:
The next thing then she waking looks upon
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
(As I can take it with another herb)
I’ll make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible;
And I will overhear their conference.

 Enter Demetrius, Helena following him.

DEMETRIUS.
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I’ll slay, the other slayeth me.
Thou told’st me they were stol’n into this wood,
And here am I, and wode within this wood
Because I cannot meet with Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.

HELENA.
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant,
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.

DEMETRIUS.
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?

HELENA.
And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love,
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Than to be usèd as you use your dog?

DEMETRIUS.
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
For I am sick when I do look on thee.

HELENA.
And I am sick when I look not on you.

DEMETRIUS.
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night
And the ill counsel of a desert place,
With the rich worth of your virginity.

HELENA.
Your virtue is my privilege: for that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night;
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?

DEMETRIUS.
I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.

HELENA.
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will, the story shall be chang’d;
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin, the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed,
When cowardice pursues and valour flies!

DEMETRIUS.
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go,
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

HELENA.
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be woo’d, and were not made to woo.

 [_Exit Demetrius._]

I’ll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
To die upon the hand I love so well.

 [_Exit Helena._]

OBERON.
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

 Enter Puck.

Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

PUCK.
Ay, there it is.

OBERON.
I pray thee give it me.
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lull’d in these flowers with dances and delight;
And there the snake throws her enamell’d skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes,
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes;
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love:
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

PUCK.
Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so.

 [_Exeunt._]


SCENE II. Another part of the wood

 Enter Titania with her Train.

TITANIA.
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then for the third part of a minute, hence;
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings,
To make my small elves coats; and some keep back
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
Then to your offices, and let me rest.

Fairies sing.

FIRST FAIRY.
    You spotted snakes with double tongue,
       Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
    Newts and blind-worms do no wrong,
       Come not near our Fairy Queen:

CHORUS.
    Philomel, with melody,
    Sing in our sweet lullaby:
Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
    Never harm, nor spell, nor charm,
    Come our lovely lady nigh;
    So good night, with lullaby.

FIRST FAIRY.
    Weaving spiders, come not here;
       Hence, you long-legg’d spinners, hence.
    Beetles black, approach not near;
       Worm nor snail do no offence.

CHORUS.
    Philomel with melody, &c.

SECOND FAIRY.
Hence away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.

 [_Exeunt Fairies. Titania sleeps._]

 Enter Oberon.

OBERON.
What thou seest when thou dost wake,

 [_Squeezes the flower on  Titania’s eyelids._]

Do it for thy true love take;
Love and languish for his sake.
Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
In thy eye that shall appear
When thou wak’st, it is thy dear.
Wake when some vile thing is near.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Lysander and Hermia.

LYSANDER.
Fair love, you faint with wand’ring in the wood.
And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way.
We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
And tarry for the comfort of the day.

HERMIA.
Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.

LYSANDER.
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.

HERMIA.
Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.

LYSANDER.
O take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in love’s conference.
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it:
Two bosoms interchainèd with an oath,
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny;
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

HERMIA.
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
Lie further off, in human modesty,
Such separation as may well be said
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend:
Thy love ne’er alter till thy sweet life end!

LYSANDER.
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I;
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!

HERMIA.
With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be pressed!

 [_They sleep._]

 Enter Puck.

PUCK.
Through the forest have I gone,
But Athenian found I none,
On whose eyes I might approve
This flower’s force in stirring love.
Night and silence! Who is here?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
This is he, my master said,
Despisèd the Athenian maid;
And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
On the dank and dirty ground.
Pretty soul, she durst not lie
Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
All the power this charm doth owe;
When thou wak’st let love forbid
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
So awake when I am gone;
For I must now to Oberon.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Demetrius and Helena, running.

HELENA.
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS.
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.

HELENA.
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.

DEMETRIUS.
Stay, on thy peril; I alone will go.

 [_Exit Demetrius._]

HELENA.
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe’er she lies,
For she hath blessèd and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener wash’d than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear:
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermia’s sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.

LYSANDER.
[_Waking._] And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!

HELENA.
Do not say so, Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.

LYSANDER.
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason sway’d,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will,
And leads me to your eyes, where I o’erlook
Love’s stories, written in love’s richest book.

HELENA.
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is’t not enough, is’t not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius’ eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well; perforce I must confess,
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
O, that a lady of one man refus’d,
Should of another therefore be abus’d!

 [_Exit._]

LYSANDER.
She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings;
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive;
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honour Helen, and to be her knight!

 [_Exit._]

HERMIA.
[_Starting._] Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander! lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, and if you hear;
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I’ll find immediately.

 [_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. The Wood.


 The Queen of Fairies still lying asleep.

 Enter Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug and Flute.

BOTTOM.
Are we all met?

QUINCE.
Pat, pat; and here’s a marvellous convenient place for our rehearsal.
This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn brake our
tiring-house; and we will do it in action, as we will do it before the
Duke.

BOTTOM.
Peter Quince?

QUINCE.
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?

BOTTOM.
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never
please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself; which the
ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?

SNOUT
By’r lakin, a parlous fear.

STARVELING.
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.

BOTTOM.
Not a whit; I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and
let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and
that Pyramus is not killed indeed; and for the more better assurance,
tell them that I Pyramus am not Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This
will put them out of fear.

QUINCE.
Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be written in eight
and six.

BOTTOM.
No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and eight.

SNOUT
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?

STARVELING.
I fear it, I promise you.

BOTTOM.
Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves, to bring in (God shield
us!) a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a
more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living; and we ought to look to
it.

SNOUT
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.

BOTTOM.
Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the
lion’s neck; and he himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the
same defect: ‘Ladies,’ or, ‘Fair ladies, I would wish you,’ or, ‘I
would request you,’ or, ’I would entreat you, not to fear, not to
tremble: my life for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it
were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing; I am a man as other men
are’: and there, indeed, let him name his name, and tell them plainly
he is Snug the joiner.

QUINCE.
Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things: that is, to bring
the moonlight into a chamber, for you know, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by
moonlight.

SNOUT
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?

BOTTOM.
A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out moonshine, find
out moonshine.

QUINCE.
Yes, it doth shine that night.

BOTTOM.
Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber window, where
we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the casement.

QUINCE.
Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and
say he comes to disfigure or to present the person of Moonshine. Then
there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber; for
Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a
wall.

SNOUT
You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?

BOTTOM.
Some man or other must present Wall. And let him have some plaster, or
some loam, or some rough-cast about him, to signify wall; and let him
hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe
whisper.

QUINCE.
If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every mother’s son,
and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your
speech, enter into that brake; and so everyone according to his cue.

 Enter Puck behind.

PUCK.
What hempen homespuns have we swaggering here,
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor;
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.

QUINCE.
Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, stand forth.

PYRAMUS.
_Thisbe, the flowers of odious savours sweet_

QUINCE.
Odours, odours.

PYRAMUS.
_. . . odours savours sweet.
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.
But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
And by and by I will to thee appear._

 [_Exit._]

PUCK.
A stranger Pyramus than e’er played here!

 [_Exit._]

THISBE.
Must I speak now?

QUINCE.
Ay, marry, must you, For you must understand he goes but to see a noise
that he heard, and is to come again.

THISBE.
_Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
Most brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,
As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire,
I’ll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny’s tomb._

QUINCE.
Ninus’ tomb, man! Why, you must not speak that yet. That you answer to
Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues, and all.—Pyramus enter!
Your cue is past; it is ‘never tire.’

THISBE.
O, _As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire._

 Enter Puck and Bottom with an ass’s head.

PYRAMUS.
_If I were fair, Thisbe, I were only thine._

QUINCE.
O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters, fly, masters!
Help!

 [_Exeunt Clowns._]

PUCK.
I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round,
   Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;
Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,
   A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.

 [_Exit._]

BOTTOM.
Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me afeard.

 Enter Snout.

SNOUT
O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on thee?

BOTTOM.
What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do you?

 [_Exit Snout._]

 Enter Quince.

QUINCE.
Bless thee, Bottom! bless thee! Thou art translated.

 [_Exit._]

BOTTOM.
I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of me, to fright me, if
they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I
will walk up and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear I am
not afraid.
[_Sings._]
       The ousel cock, so black of hue,
          With orange-tawny bill,
       The throstle with his note so true,
          The wren with little quill.

TITANIA.
[_Waking._] What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?

BOTTOM.
[_Sings._]
       The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
          The plain-song cuckoo gray,
       Whose note full many a man doth mark,
          And dares not answer nay.
for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? Who would give
a bird the lie, though he cry ‘cuckoo’ never so?

TITANIA.
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamour’d of thy note.
So is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape;
And thy fair virtue’s force perforce doth move me,
On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.

BOTTOM.
Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that. And yet, to
say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbours will not make them
friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.

TITANIA.
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.

BOTTOM.
Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I
have enough to serve mine own turn.

TITANIA.
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state;
And I do love thee: therefore, go with me.
I’ll give thee fairies to attend on thee;
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
And sing, while thou on pressèd flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.—
Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!

 Enter four Fairies.

PEASEBLOSSOM.
Ready.


COBWEB.
And I.


MOTH.
And I.


MUSTARDSEED.
And I.


ALL.
Where shall we go?

TITANIA.
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers, crop their waxen thighs,
And light them at the fiery glow-worm’s eyes,
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.


PEASEBLOSSOM.
Hail, mortal!


COBWEB.
Hail!


MOTH.
Hail!


MUSTARDSEED.
Hail!

BOTTOM.
I cry your worships mercy, heartily.—I beseech your worship’s name.

COBWEB.
Cobweb.

BOTTOM.
I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb. If I cut
my finger, I shall make bold with you.—Your name, honest gentleman?

PEASEBLOSSOM.
Peaseblossom.

BOTTOM.
I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and to Master
Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
more acquaintance too.—Your name, I beseech you, sir?

MUSTARDSEED.
Mustardseed.

BOTTOM.
Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That same cowardly
giant-like ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you
of more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.

TITANIA.
Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.
   The moon, methinks, looks with a watery eye,
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
   Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my love’s tongue, bring him silently.

 [_Exeunt._]


SCENE II. Another part of the wood

 Enter Oberon.

OBERON.
I wonder if Titania be awak’d;
Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.

 Enter Puck.

Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?

PUCK.
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus’ nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
Forsook his scene and enter’d in a brake.
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass’s nole I fixed on his head.
Anon, his Thisbe must be answerèd,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun’s report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And at our stamp, here o’er and o’er one falls;
He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears, thus strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear,
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania wak’d, and straightway lov’d an ass.

OBERON.
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latch’d the Athenian’s eyes
With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?

PUCK.
I took him sleeping—that is finish’d too—
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he wak’d, of force she must be ey’d.

 Enter Demetrius and Hermia.

OBERON.
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.

PUCK.
This is the woman, but not this the man.

DEMETRIUS.
O why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.

HERMIA.
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o’er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stol’n away
From sleeping Hermia? I’ll believe as soon
This whole earth may be bor’d, and that the moon
May through the centre creep and so displease
Her brother’s noontide with th’ Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murder’d him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.

DEMETRIUS.
So should the murder’d look, and so should I,
Pierc’d through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.

HERMIA.
What’s this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?

DEMETRIUS.
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.

HERMIA.
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv’st me past the bounds
Of maiden’s patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never number’d among men!
O once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!
Durst thou have look’d upon him, being awake,
And hast thou kill’d him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it; for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

DEMETRIUS.
You spend your passion on a mispris’d mood:
I am not guilty of Lysander’s blood;
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.

HERMIA.
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.

DEMETRIUS.
And if I could, what should I get therefore?

HERMIA.
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so:
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.

 [_Exit._]

DEMETRIUS.
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow’s heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.

 [_Lies down._]

OBERON.
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
And laid the love-juice on some true-love’s sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true love turn’d, and not a false turn’d true.

PUCK.
Then fate o’er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

OBERON.
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is, and pale of cheer
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here;
I’ll charm his eyes against she do appear.

PUCK.
I go, I go; look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.

 [_Exit._]

OBERON.
    Flower of this purple dye,
    Hit with Cupid’s archery,
    Sink in apple of his eye.
    When his love he doth espy,
    Let her shine as gloriously
    As the Venus of the sky.—
    When thou wak’st, if she be by,
    Beg of her for remedy.

 Enter Puck.

PUCK.
    Captain of our fairy band,
    Helena is here at hand,
    And the youth mistook by me,
    Pleading for a lover’s fee.
    Shall we their fond pageant see?
    Lord, what fools these mortals be!

OBERON.
    Stand aside. The noise they make
    Will cause Demetrius to awake.

PUCK.
    Then will two at once woo one.
    That must needs be sport alone;
    And those things do best please me
    That befall prepost’rously.

 Enter Lysander and Helena.

LYSANDER.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?

HELENA.
You do advance your cunning more and more.
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
These vows are Hermia’s: will you give her o’er?
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.

LYSANDER.
I had no judgment when to her I swore.

HELENA.
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o’er.

LYSANDER.
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.

DEMETRIUS.
[_Waking._] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealèd white, high Taurus’ snow,
Fann’d with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold’st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!

HELENA.
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil, and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so;
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
And now both rivals, to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid’s eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin, and extort
A poor soul’s patience, all to make you sport.

LYSANDER.
You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
In Hermia’s love I yield you up my part;
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.

HELENA.
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.

DEMETRIUS.
Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.
If e’er I lov’d her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn’d;
And now to Helen is it home return’d,
There to remain.

LYSANDER.
Helen, it is not so.

DEMETRIUS.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.

 Enter Hermia.

HERMIA.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?

LYSANDER.
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?

HERMIA.
What love could press Lysander from my side?

LYSANDER.
Lysander’s love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seek’st thou me? Could not this make thee know
The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?

HERMIA.
You speak not as you think; it cannot be.

HELENA.
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoin’d all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid!
Have you conspir’d, have you with these contriv’d,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shar’d,
The sisters’ vows, the hours that we have spent,
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us—O, is all forgot?
All school-days’ friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet a union in partition,
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem;
So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crownèd with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly, ’tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.

HERMIA.
I am amazèd at your passionate words:
I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.

HELENA.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me, and praise my eyes and face?
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unlov’d?
This you should pity rather than despise.

HERMIA.
I understand not what you mean by this.

HELENA.
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare ye well. ’Tis partly my own fault,
Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy.

LYSANDER.
Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!

HELENA.
O excellent!

HERMIA.
Sweet, do not scorn her so.

DEMETRIUS.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.

LYSANDER.
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
I swear by that which I will lose for thee
To prove him false that says I love thee not.

DEMETRIUS.
I say I love thee more than he can do.

LYSANDER.
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.

DEMETRIUS.
Quick, come.

HERMIA.
Lysander, whereto tends all this?

LYSANDER.
Away, you Ethiope!

DEMETRIUS.
No, no. He will
Seem to break loose. Take on as you would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!

LYSANDER.
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.

HERMIA.
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?

LYSANDER.
Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!
Out, loathèd medicine! O hated potion, hence!

HERMIA.
Do you not jest?

HELENA.
Yes, sooth, and so do you.

LYSANDER.
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.

DEMETRIUS.
I would I had your bond; for I perceive
A weak bond holds you; I’ll not trust your word.

LYSANDER.
What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I’ll not harm her so.

HERMIA.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me! what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you lov’d me; yet since night you left me.
Why then, you left me—O, the gods forbid!—
In earnest, shall I say?

LYSANDER.
Ay, by my life;
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
Be certain, nothing truer; ’tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.

HERMIA.
O me! You juggler! You cankerblossom!
You thief of love! What! have you come by night
And stol’n my love’s heart from him?

HELENA.
Fine, i’ faith!
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!

HERMIA.
Puppet! Why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urg’d her height;
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail’d with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak,
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

HELENA.
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
I am a right maid for my cowardice;
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.

HERMIA.
Lower! Hark, again.

HELENA.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong’d you,
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He follow’d you; for love I follow’d him;
But he hath chid me hence, and threaten’d me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too:
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back,
And follow you no further. Let me go:
You see how simple and how fond I am.

HERMIA.
Why, get you gone. Who is’t that hinders you?

HELENA.
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.

HERMIA.
What! with Lysander?

HELENA.
With Demetrius.

LYSANDER.
Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.

DEMETRIUS.
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.

HELENA.
O, when she’s angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.

HERMIA.
Little again! Nothing but low and little?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.

LYSANDER.
Get you gone, you dwarf;
You minimus, of hind’ring knot-grass made;
You bead, you acorn.

DEMETRIUS.
You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena;
Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.

LYSANDER.
Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou dar’st, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.

DEMETRIUS.
Follow! Nay, I’ll go with thee, cheek by jole.

 [_Exeunt Lysander and Demetrius._]

HERMIA.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
Nay, go not back.

HELENA.
I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.

 [_Exit._]

HERMIA.
I am amaz’d, and know not what to say.

 [_Exit, pursuing Helena._]

OBERON.
This is thy negligence: still thou mistak’st,
Or else commit’st thy knaveries willfully.

PUCK.
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have ’nointed an Athenian’s eyes:
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

OBERON.
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog, as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another’s way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till o’er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander’s eye,
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
I’ll to my queen, and beg her Indian boy;
And then I will her charmèd eye release
From monster’s view, and all things shall be peace.

PUCK.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wandering here and there
Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all,
That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone;
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They wilfully themselves exile from light,
And must for aye consort with black-brow’d night.

OBERON.
But we are spirits of another sort:
I with the morning’s love have oft made sport;
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessèd beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.

 [_Exit Oberon._]

PUCK.
    Up and down, up and down,
    I will lead them up and down.
    I am fear’d in field and town.
    Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.

 Enter Lysander.

LYSANDER.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.

PUCK.
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?

LYSANDER.
I will be with thee straight.

PUCK.
Follow me then to plainer ground.

 [_Exit Lysander as following the voice._]

 Enter Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS.
Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak. In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?

PUCK.
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child!
I’ll whip thee with a rod. He is defil’d
That draws a sword on thee.

DEMETRIUS.
Yea, art thou there?

PUCK.
Follow my voice; we’ll try no manhood here.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Lysander.

LYSANDER.
He goes before me, and still dares me on;
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heel’d than I:
I follow’d fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me.  Come, thou gentle day!
[_Lies down._] For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
I’ll find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.

 [_Sleeps._]

 Enter Puck and Demetrius.

PUCK.
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com’st thou not?

DEMETRIUS.
Abide me, if thou dar’st; for well I wot
Thou runn’st before me, shifting every place,
And dar’st not stand, nor look me in the face.
Where art thou?

PUCK.
Come hither; I am here.

DEMETRIUS.
Nay, then, thou mock’st me. Thou shalt buy this dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see:
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day’s approach look to be visited.

 [_Lies down and sleeps._]

 Enter Helena.

HELENA.
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
    Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east,
That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow’s eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.

 [_Sleeps._]

PUCK.
    Yet but three? Come one more.
    Two of both kinds makes up four.
    Here she comes, curst and sad.
    Cupid is a knavish lad
    Thus to make poor females mad.

 Enter Hermia.

HERMIA.
Never so weary, never so in woe,
   Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go;
   My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!

 [_Lies down._]

PUCK.
         On the ground
         Sleep sound.
         I’ll apply
         To your eye,
       Gentle lover, remedy.

 [_Squeezing the juice on Lysander’s eye._]

         When thou wak’st,
         Thou tak’st
         True delight
         In the sight
       Of thy former lady’s eye.
       And the country proverb known,
       That every man should take his own,
       In your waking shall be shown:
         Jack shall have Jill;
         Nought shall go ill;
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.

 [_Exit Puck._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The Wood


 Lysander, Demetrius, Helena and Hermia still asleep.

 Enter Titania and Bottom; Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, Mustardseed and
 other Fairies attending; Oberon behind, unseen.

TITANIA.
Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,
   While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
   And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.

BOTTOM.
Where’s Peaseblossom?

PEASEBLOSSOM.
Ready.

BOTTOM.
Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s Monsieur Cobweb?

COBWEB.
Ready.

BOTTOM.
Monsieur Cobweb; good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and
kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle; and, good
monsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the
action, monsieur; and, good monsieur, have a care the honey-bag break
not; I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey-bag, signior.
Where’s Monsieur Mustardseed?

MUSTARDSEED.
Ready.

BOTTOM.
Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave your courtesy,
good monsieur.

MUSTARDSEED.
What’s your will?

BOTTOM.
Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must
to the barber’s, monsieur, for methinks I am marvellous hairy about the
face; and I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must
scratch.

TITANIA.
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?

BOTTOM.
I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let us have the tongs and the
bones.


TITANIA.
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.

BOTTOM.
Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry oats. Methinks
I have a great desire to a bottle of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no
fellow.

TITANIA.
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel’s hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.

BOTTOM.
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I pray you, let
none of your people stir me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon
me.

TITANIA.
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist, the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!

 [_They sleep._]

 Oberon advances. Enter Puck.

OBERON.
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her:
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets’ eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begg’d my patience,
I then did ask of her her changeling child;
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformèd scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair,
And think no more of this night’s accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.

 [_Touching her eyes with an herb._]

    Be as thou wast wont to be;
    See as thou was wont to see.
    Dian’s bud o’er Cupid’s flower
    Hath such force and blessed power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.

TITANIA.
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamour’d of an ass.

OBERON.
There lies your love.

TITANIA.
How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!

OBERON.
Silence awhile.—Robin, take off this head.
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep, of all these five the sense.

TITANIA.
Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep.

PUCK.
Now when thou wak’st, with thine own fool’s eyes peep.

OBERON.
Sound, music.

 [_Still music._]

Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus’ house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity:
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.

PUCK.
    Fairy king, attend and mark.
    I do hear the morning lark.

OBERON.
    Then, my queen, in silence sad,
    Trip we after night’s shade.
    We the globe can compass soon,
    Swifter than the wand’ring moon.

TITANIA.
    Come, my lord, and in our flight,
    Tell me how it came this night
    That I sleeping here was found
    With these mortals on the ground.

 [_Exeunt. Horns sound within._]

 Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus and Train.

THESEUS.
Go, one of you, find out the forester;
For now our observation is perform’d;
And since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch I say, and find the forester.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

We will, fair queen, up to the mountain’s top,
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

HIPPOLYTA.
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they bay’d the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding; for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seem’d all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

THESEUS.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flew’d, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-knee’d and dewlap’d like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but match’d in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tuneable
Was never holla’d to, nor cheer’d with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.—But, soft, what nymphs are these?

EGEUS.
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is;
This Helena, old Nedar’s Helena:
I wonder of their being here together.

THESEUS.
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May; and, hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?

EGEUS.
It is, my lord.

THESEUS.
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.

 Horns, and shout within. Demetrius, Lysander, Hermia and Helena wake
 and start up.

Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?

LYSANDER.
Pardon, my lord.

 He and the rest kneel to  Theseus.

THESEUS.
I pray you all, stand up.
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?

LYSANDER.
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking; but as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But, as I think (for truly would I speak)
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might be
Without the peril of the Athenian law.

EGEUS.
Enough, enough, my lord; you have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stol’n away, they would, Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife, and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.

DEMETRIUS.
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
And I in fury hither follow’d them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power,
(But by some power it is) my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betroth’d ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will for evermore be true to it.

THESEUS.
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.
Egeus, I will overbear your will;
For in the temple, by and by with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purpos’d hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We’ll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.

 [_Exeunt Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus and Train._]

DEMETRIUS.
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turnèd into clouds.

HERMIA.
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.

HELENA.
So methinks.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own, and not mine own.

DEMETRIUS.
Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?

HERMIA.
Yea, and my father.

HELENA.
And Hippolyta.

LYSANDER.
And he did bid us follow to the temple.

DEMETRIUS.
Why, then, we are awake: let’s follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.

 [_Exeunt._]

BOTTOM.
[_Waking._] When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My next is
‘Most fair Pyramus.’ Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender!
Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God’s my life! Stol’n hence, and left me
asleep! I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream, past the wit
of man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to
expound this dream. Methought I was—there is no man can tell what.
Methought I was, and methought I had—but man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not
heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man’s hand is not able to taste,
his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was. I
will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream: it shall be
called ‘Bottom’s Dream’, because it hath no bottom; and I will sing it
in the latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure, to make it
the more gracious, I shall sing it at her death.

 [_Exit._]


SCENE II. Athens. A Room in Quince’s House

 Enter Quince, Flute, Snout and Starveling.

QUINCE.
Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come home yet?

STARVELING.
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.

FLUTE.
If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward, doth it?

QUINCE.
It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge
Pyramus but he.

FLUTE.
No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.

QUINCE.
Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very paramour for a sweet
voice.


FLUTE.
You must say paragon. A paramour is, God bless us, a thing of naught.

 Enter Snug.

SNUG
Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three
lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had
all been made men.

FLUTE.
O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life;
he could not have ’scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given him
sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I’ll be hanged. He would have
deserved it: sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing.

 Enter Bottom.

BOTTOM.
Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?

QUINCE.
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!

BOTTOM.
Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not what; for if I tell
you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you everything, right as it
fell out.

QUINCE.
Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

BOTTOM.
Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the Duke hath
dined. Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new
ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the palace; every man look
o’er his part. For the short and the long is, our play is preferred. In
any case, let Thisbe have clean linen; and let not him that plays the
lion pare his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion’s claws. And
most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlick, for we are to utter sweet
breath; and I do not doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy.
No more words. Away! Go, away!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Athens. An Apartment in the Palace of Theseus


 Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate, Lords and Attendants.

HIPPOLYTA.
’Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.

THESEUS.
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all compact:
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
That is the madman: the lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt:
The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination,
That if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear?

HIPPOLYTA.
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigur’d so together,
More witnesseth than fancy’s images,
And grows to something of great constancy;
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.

 Enter lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia and Helena.

THESEUS.
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!

LYSANDER.
More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!

THESEUS.
Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bed-time?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE.
Here, mighty Theseus.

THESEUS.
Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?
What masque? What music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time, if not with some delight?

PHILOSTRATE.
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.

 [_Giving a paper._]

THESEUS.
[_Reads_] ‘The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.’
We’ll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
‘The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage?’
That is an old device, and it was play’d
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
‘The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
Of learning, late deceas’d in beggary.’
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
‘A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
And his love Thisbe; very tragical mirth.’
Merry and tragical? Tedious and brief?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
How shall we find the concord of this discord?

PHILOSTRATE.
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
Which is as brief as I have known a play;
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious. For in all the play
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehears’d, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.

THESEUS.
What are they that do play it?

PHILOSTRATE.
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labour’d in their minds till now;
And now have toil’d their unbreath’d memories
With this same play against your nuptial.

THESEUS.
And we will hear it.

PHILOSTRATE.
No, my noble lord,
It is not for you: I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretch’d and conn’d with cruel pain
To do you service.

THESEUS.
I will hear that play;
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in: and take your places, ladies.

 [_Exit Philostrate._]

HIPPOLYTA.
I love not to see wretchedness o’ercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.

THESEUS.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.

HIPPOLYTA.
He says they can do nothing in this kind.

THESEUS.
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake:
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practis’d accent in their fears,
And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I pick’d a welcome;
And in the modesty of fearful duty
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most to my capacity.

 Enter Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE.
So please your grace, the Prologue is address’d.

THESEUS.
Let him approach.

 Flourish of trumpets. Enter the Prologue.

PROLOGUE
If we offend, it is with our good will.
That you should think, we come not to offend,
But with good will.  To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then, we come but in despite.
We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is.  All for your delight
We are not here.  That you should here repent you,
The actors are at hand, and, by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.

THESEUS.
This fellow doth not stand upon points.

LYSANDER.
He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows not the stop. A
good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.

HIPPOLYTA.
Indeed he hath played on this prologue like a child on a recorder; a
sound, but not in government.

THESEUS.
His speech was like a tangled chain; nothing impaired, but all
disordered. Who is next?

 Enter Pyramus and Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine and Lion as in dumb show.

PROLOGUE
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
Wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder;
And through Wall’s chink, poor souls, they are content
To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
Presenteth Moonshine, for, if you will know,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus’ tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast (which Lion hight by name)
The trusty Thisbe, coming first by night,
Did scare away, or rather did affright;
And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth, and tall,
And finds his trusty Thisbe’s mantle slain;
Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
He bravely broach’d his boiling bloody breast;
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,
At large discourse while here they do remain.

 [_Exeunt Prologue, Pyramus, Thisbe, Lion and Moonshine._]

THESEUS.
I wonder if the lion be to speak.

DEMETRIUS.
No wonder, my lord. One lion may, when many asses do.

WALL.
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall:
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often very secretly.
This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone, doth show
That I am that same wall; the truth is so:
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

THESEUS.
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?

DEMETRIUS.
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.

THESEUS.
Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.

 Enter Pyramus.

PYRAMUS.
O grim-look’d night! O night with hue so black!
O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbe’s promise is forgot!
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
That stand’st between her father’s ground and mine;
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.

 [_Wall holds up his fingers._]

Thanks, courteous wall: Jove shield thee well for this!
But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
Curs’d be thy stones for thus deceiving me!

THESEUS.
The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.

PYRAMUS.
No, in truth, sir, he should not. ‘Deceiving me’ is Thisbe’s cue: she
is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall. You shall see it
will fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.

 Enter Thisbe.

THISBE.
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans,
For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kiss’d thy stones,
Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

PYRAMUS.
I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
To spy an I can hear my Thisbe’s face.
Thisbe?

THISBE.
My love thou art, my love I think.

PYRAMUS.
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover’s grace;
And like Limander am I trusty still.

THISBE.
And I like Helen, till the fates me kill.

PYRAMUS.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

THISBE.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

PYRAMUS.
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.

THISBE.
I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.

PYRAMUS.
Wilt thou at Ninny’s tomb meet me straightway?

THISBE.
’Tide life, ’tide death, I come without delay.

WALL.
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.

 [_Exeunt Wall, Pyramus and Thisbe._]

THESEUS.
Now is the mural down between the two neighbours.

DEMETRIUS.
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear without warning.

HIPPOLYTA.
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.

THESEUS.
The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst are no worse, if
imagination amend them.

HIPPOLYTA.
It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.

THESEUS.
If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass
for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.

 Enter Lion and Moonshine.

LION.
You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am
A lion fell, nor else no lion’s dam;
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, ’twere pity on my life.

THESEUS.
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.

DEMETRIUS.
The very best at a beast, my lord, that e’er I saw.

LYSANDER.
This lion is a very fox for his valour.

THESEUS.
True; and a goose for his discretion.

DEMETRIUS.
Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his discretion, and the
fox carries the goose.

THESEUS.
His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour; for the goose
carries not the fox. It is well; leave it to his discretion, and let us
listen to the moon.

MOONSHINE.
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present.

DEMETRIUS.
He should have worn the horns on his head.

THESEUS.
He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the
circumference.

MOONSHINE.
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present;
Myself the man i’ the moon do seem to be.

THESEUS.
This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should be put into
the lantern. How is it else the man i’ the moon?

DEMETRIUS.
He dares not come there for the candle, for you see, it is already in
snuff.

HIPPOLYTA.
I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!

THESEUS.
It appears by his small light of discretion that he is in the wane; but
yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.

LYSANDER.
Proceed, Moon.

MOON.
All that I have to say, is to tell you that the lantern is the moon; I
the man i’ the moon; this thorn-bush my thorn-bush; and this dog my
dog.

DEMETRIUS.
Why, all these should be in the lantern, for all these are in the moon.
But silence; here comes Thisbe.

 Enter Thisbe.

THISBE.
This is old Ninny’s tomb. Where is my love?

LION.
Oh!

 [_The Lion roars, Thisbe runs off._]

DEMETRIUS.
Well roared, Lion.

THESEUS.
Well run, Thisbe.

HIPPOLYTA.
Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good grace.

 [_The Lion tears Thisbe’s mantle, and exit._]

THESEUS.
Well moused, Lion.

DEMETRIUS.
And then came Pyramus.

LYSANDER.
And so the lion vanished.

 Enter Pyramus.

PYRAMUS.
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,
I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.
             But stay! O spite!
             But mark, poor knight,
         What dreadful dole is here!
             Eyes, do you see?
             How can it be?
         O dainty duck! O dear!
             Thy mantle good,
             What, stained with blood?
         Approach, ye Furies fell!
             O Fates, come, come;
             Cut thread and thrum;
         Quail, rush, conclude, and quell!

THESEUS.
This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go near to make a
man look sad.

HIPPOLYTA.
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.

PYRAMUS.
O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,
Since lion vile hath here deflower’d my dear?
Which is—no, no—which was the fairest dame
That liv’d, that lov’d, that lik’d, that look’d with cheer.
             Come, tears, confound!
             Out, sword, and wound
         The pap of Pyramus;
             Ay, that left pap,
             Where heart doth hop:
         Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
             Now am I dead,
             Now am I fled;
         My soul is in the sky.
             Tongue, lose thy light!
             Moon, take thy flight!
         Now die, die, die, die, die.

 [_Dies. Exit Moonshine._]

DEMETRIUS.
No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.

LYSANDER.
Less than an ace, man; for he is dead, he is nothing.

THESEUS.
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.

HIPPOLYTA.
How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her
lover?


THESEUS.
She will find him by starlight.

 Enter Thisbe.

Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.

HIPPOLYTA.
Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus. I hope she
will be brief.

DEMETRIUS.
A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the
better: he for a man, God warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us!

LYSANDER.
She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.

DEMETRIUS.
And thus she means, _videlicet_—

THISBE.
             Asleep, my love?
             What, dead, my dove?
         O Pyramus, arise,
             Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
             Dead, dead? A tomb
         Must cover thy sweet eyes.
             These lily lips,
             This cherry nose,
         These yellow cowslip cheeks,
             Are gone, are gone!
             Lovers, make moan;
         His eyes were green as leeks.
             O Sisters Three,
             Come, come to me,
         With hands as pale as milk;
             Lay them in gore,
             Since you have shore
         With shears his thread of silk.
             Tongue, not a word:
             Come, trusty sword,
         Come, blade, my breast imbrue;
             And farewell, friends.
             Thus Thisbe ends.
         Adieu, adieu, adieu.

 [_Dies._]

THESEUS.
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.

DEMETRIUS.
Ay, and Wall too.

BOTTOM.
No, I assure you; the wall is down that parted their fathers. Will it
please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between
two of our company?

THESEUS.
No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no excuse. Never excuse;
for when the players are all dead there need none to be blamed. Marry,
if he that writ it had played Pyramus, and hanged himself in Thisbe’s
garter, it would have been a fine tragedy; and so it is, truly; and
very notably discharged. But come, your Bergomask; let your epilogue
alone.

 [_Here a dance of Clowns._]

The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed; ’tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
As much as we this night have overwatch’d.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguil’d
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In nightly revels and new jollity.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Puck.

PUCK.
   Now the hungry lion roars,
      And the wolf behowls the moon;
   Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
      All with weary task fordone.
   Now the wasted brands do glow,
      Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
   Puts the wretch that lies in woe
      In remembrance of a shroud.
   Now it is the time of night
      That the graves, all gaping wide,
   Every one lets forth his sprite,
      In the church-way paths to glide.
   And we fairies, that do run
      By the triple Hecate’s team
   From the presence of the sun,
      Following darkness like a dream,
   Now are frolic; not a mouse
      Shall disturb this hallow’d house.
   I am sent with broom before,
      To sweep the dust behind the door.

 Enter Oberon and Titania with their Train.

OBERON.
   Through the house give glimmering light,
        By the dead and drowsy fire.
   Every elf and fairy sprite
        Hop as light as bird from brier,
   And this ditty after me,
   Sing and dance it trippingly.

TITANIA.
   First rehearse your song by rote,
        To each word a warbling note;
   Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
   Will we sing, and bless this place.

 [_Song and Dance._]

OBERON.
   Now, until the break of day,
   Through this house each fairy stray.
   To the best bride-bed will we,
   Which by us shall blessèd be;
   And the issue there create
   Ever shall be fortunate.
   So shall all the couples three
   Ever true in loving be;
   And the blots of Nature’s hand
   Shall not in their issue stand:
   Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,
   Nor mark prodigious, such as are
   Despised in nativity,
   Shall upon their children be.
   With this field-dew consecrate,
   Every fairy take his gait,
   And each several chamber bless,
   Through this palace, with sweet peace;
   And the owner of it blest.
   Ever shall it in safety rest,
   Trip away. Make no stay;
   Meet me all by break of day.

 [_Exeunt Oberon, Titania and Train._]

PUCK.
   If we shadows have offended,
   Think but this, and all is mended,
   That you have but slumber’d here
   While these visions did appear.
   And this weak and idle theme,
   No more yielding but a dream,
   Gentles, do not reprehend.
   If you pardon, we will mend.
   And, as I am an honest Puck,
   If we have unearnèd luck
   Now to ’scape the serpent’s tongue,
   We will make amends ere long;
   Else the Puck a liar call.
   So, good night unto you all.
   Give me your hands, if we be friends,
   And Robin shall restore amends.

 [_Exit._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MERCHANT OF VENICE ***




cover




THE MERCHANT OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Venice. A street.
Scene II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene III. Venice. A public place.

ACT II
Scene I. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene II. Venice. A street.
Scene III. The same. A room in Shylock’s house.
Scene IV. The same. A street.
Scene V. The same. Before Shylock’s house.
Scene VI. The same.
Scene VII. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene VIII. Venice. A street.
Scene IX. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

ACT III
Scene I. Venice. A street.
Scene II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene III. Venice. A street.
Scene IV. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.
Scene V. The same. A garden.

ACT IV
Scene I. Venice. A court of justice.
Scene II. The same. A street.

ACT V
Scene I. Belmont. The avenue to Portia’s house.




Dramatis Personæ

THE DUKE OF VENICE
THE PRINCE OF MOROCCO, suitor to Portia
THE PRINCE OF ARRAGON, suitor to Portia
ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
BASSANIO, his friend, suitor to Portia
GRATIANO, friend to Antonio and Bassanio
SOLANIO, friend to Antonio and Bassanio
SALARINO, friend to Antonio and Bassanio
LORENZO, in love with Jessica
SHYLOCK, a rich Jew
TUBAL, a Jew, his friend
LAUNCELET GOBBO, a clown, servant to Shylock
OLD GOBBO, father to Launcelet
LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
BALTHAZAR, servant to Portia
STEPHANO, servant to Portia
SALERIO, a messenger from Venice

PORTIA, a rich heiress
NERISSA, her waiting-woman
JESSICA, daughter to Shylock

Magnificoes of Venice, Officers of the Court of Justice, a Gaoler,
Servants and other Attendants

SCENE: Partly at Venice, and partly at Belmont, the seat of Portia on
the Continent




ACT I

SCENE I. Venice. A street.


 Enter Antonio, Salarino and Solanio.

ANTONIO.
In sooth I know not why I am so sad,
It wearies me, you say it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff ’tis made of, whereof it is born,
I am to learn.
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me,
That I have much ado to know myself.

SALARINO.
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
There where your argosies, with portly sail
Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
Or as it were the pageants of the sea,
Do overpeer the petty traffickers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
As they fly by them with their woven wings.

SOLANIO.
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Peering in maps for ports, and piers and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

SALARINO.
My wind cooling my broth
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy hour-glass run
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew dock’d in sand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
And see the holy edifice of stone
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle vessel’s side,
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And, in a word, but even now worth this,
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanc’d would make me sad?
But tell not me, I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

ANTONIO.
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year.
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

SALARINO.
Why then you are in love.

ANTONIO.
Fie, fie!

SALARINO.
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and ’twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus,
Nature hath fram’d strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper.
And other of such vinegar aspect
That they’ll not show their teeth in way of smile
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

 Enter Bassanio, Lorenzo and Gratiano.

SOLANIO.
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare ye well.
We leave you now with better company.

SALARINO.
I would have stay’d till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

ANTONIO.
Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace th’ occasion to depart.

SALARINO.
Good morrow, my good lords.

BASSANIO.
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say, when?
You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?

SALARINO.
We’ll make our leisures to attend on yours.

 [_Exeunt Salarino and Solanio._]

LORENZO.
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
We two will leave you, but at dinner-time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

BASSANIO.
I will not fail you.

GRATIANO.
You look not well, Signior Antonio,
You have too much respect upon the world.
They lose it that do buy it with much care.
Believe me, you are marvellously chang’d.

ANTONIO.
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,
A stage, where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

GRATIANO.
Let me play the fool,
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? And creep into the jaundice
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio,
(I love thee, and ’tis my love that speaks):
There are a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dress’d in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say, “I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark.”
O my Antonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing; when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.
I’ll tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.
Come, good Lorenzo. Fare ye well a while.
I’ll end my exhortation after dinner.

LORENZO.
Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

GRATIANO.
Well, keep me company but two years moe,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.

ANTONIO.
Fare you well. I’ll grow a talker for this gear.

GRATIANO.
Thanks, i’ faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neat’s tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.

 [_Exeunt Gratiano and Lorenzo._]

ANTONIO.
Is that anything now?

BASSANIO.
Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all
Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of
chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them
they are not worth the search.

ANTONIO.
Well, tell me now what lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
That you today promis’d to tell me of?

BASSANIO.
’Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
How much I have disabled mine estate
By something showing a more swelling port
Than my faint means would grant continuance.
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg’d
From such a noble rate, but my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
Hath left me gag’d. To you, Antonio,
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

ANTONIO.
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
Within the eye of honour, be assur’d
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlock’d to your occasions.

BASSANIO.
In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
The self-same way, with more advised watch
To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and, like a wilful youth,
That which I owe is lost. But if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim, or to find both,
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

ANTONIO.
You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance;
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Than if you had made waste of all I have.
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am prest unto it. Therefore, speak.

BASSANIO.
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages:
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalu’d
To Cato’s daughter, Brutus’ Portia.
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos’ strond,
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
O my Antonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift
That I should questionless be fortunate.

ANTONIO.
Thou know’st that all my fortunes are at sea;
Neither have I money nor commodity
To raise a present sum, therefore go forth
Try what my credit can in Venice do;
That shall be rack’d even to the uttermost,
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently inquire, and so will I,
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust or for my sake.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Portia with her waiting-woman Nerissa.

PORTIA.
By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.

NERISSA.
You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance
as your good fortunes are. And yet, for aught I see, they are as sick
that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. It is no
mean happiness, therefore, to be seated in the mean. Superfluity come
sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.

PORTIA.
Good sentences, and well pronounc’d.

NERISSA.
They would be better if well followed.

PORTIA.
If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been
churches, and poor men’s cottages princes’ palaces. It is a good divine
that follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twenty what were
good to be done than to be one of the twenty to follow mine own
teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper
leaps o’er a cold decree; such a hare is madness the youth, to skip
o’er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not
in the fashion to choose me a husband. O me, the word “choose”! I may
neither choose who I would nor refuse who I dislike, so is the will of
a living daughter curb’d by the will of a dead father. Is it not hard,
Nerissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?

NERISSA.
Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good
inspirations. Therefore the lott’ry that he hath devised in these three
chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning
chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one who
you shall rightly love. But what warmth is there in your affection
towards any of these princely suitors that are already come?

PORTIA.
I pray thee over-name them, and as thou namest them, I will describe
them, and according to my description level at my affection.

NERISSA.
First, there is the Neapolitan prince.

PORTIA.
Ay, that’s a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse,
and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can
shoe him himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother play’d false with
a smith.

NERISSA.
Then is there the County Palatine.

PORTIA.
He doth nothing but frown, as who should say “And you will not have me,
choose.” He hears merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the
weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly
sadness in his youth. I had rather be married to a death’s-head with a
bone in his mouth than to either of these. God defend me from these
two!

NERISSA.
How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?

PORTIA.
God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man. In truth, I know it
is a sin to be a mocker, but he! why, he hath a horse better than the
Neapolitan’s, a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine.
He is every man in no man. If a throstle sing, he falls straight
a-cap’ring. He will fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I
should marry twenty husbands. If he would despise me, I would forgive
him, for if he love me to madness, I shall never requite him.

NERISSA.
What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of England?

PORTIA.
You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him: he
hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the
court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English. He is a
proper man’s picture; but alas, who can converse with a dumb-show? How
oddly he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round
hose in France, his bonnet in Germany, and his behaviour everywhere.

NERISSA.
What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?

PORTIA.
That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the
ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him again when he was
able. I think the Frenchman became his surety, and seal’d under for
another.

NERISSA.
How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony’s nephew?

PORTIA.
Very vilely in the morning when he is sober, and most vilely in the
afternoon when he is drunk: when he is best, he is a little worse than
a man, and when he is worst, he is little better than a beast. And the
worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him.

NERISSA.
If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket, you should
refuse to perform your father’s will, if you should refuse to accept
him.

PORTIA.
Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep glass of
Rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and
that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do anything,
Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.

NERISSA.
You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords. They have
acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to
their home, and to trouble you with no more suit, unless you may be won
by some other sort than your father’s imposition, depending on the
caskets.

PORTIA.
If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as Diana,
unless I be obtained by the manner of my father’s will. I am glad this
parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but
I dote on his very absence. And I pray God grant them a fair departure.

NERISSA.
Do you not remember, lady, in your father’s time, a Venetian, a scholar
and a soldier, that came hither in company of the Marquis of
Montferrat?

PORTIA.
Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think, so was he call’d.

NERISSA.
True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes look’d upon,
was the best deserving a fair lady.

PORTIA.
I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.

 Enter a Servingman.

How now! what news?

SERVINGMAN.
The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave. And there
is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings
word the Prince his master will be here tonight.

PORTIA.
If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I can bid the
other four farewell, I should be glad of his approach. If he have the
condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather he
should shrive me than wive me. Come, Nerissa. Sirrah, go before. Whiles
we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the door.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Venice. A public place.

 Enter Bassanio with Shylock the Jew.

SHYLOCK.
Three thousand ducats, well.

BASSANIO.
Ay, sir, for three months.

SHYLOCK.
For three months, well.

BASSANIO.
For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.

SHYLOCK.
Antonio shall become bound, well.

BASSANIO.
May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your answer?

SHYLOCK.
Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.

BASSANIO.
Your answer to that.

SHYLOCK.
Antonio is a good man.

BASSANIO.
Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?

SHYLOCK.
Ho, no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man is to have
you understand me that he is sufficient. Yet his means are in
supposition: he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the
Indies. I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a third at
Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures he hath squandered
abroad. But ships are but boards, sailors but men; there be land-rats
and water-rats, water-thieves and land-thieves—I mean pirates—and then
there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks. The man is,
notwithstanding, sufficient. Three thousand ducats. I think I may take
his bond.

BASSANIO.
Be assured you may.

SHYLOCK.
I will be assured I may. And that I may be assured, I will bethink me.
May I speak with Antonio?

BASSANIO.
If it please you to dine with us.

SHYLOCK.
Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet, the
Nazarite, conjured the devil into. I will buy with you, sell with you,
talk with you, walk with you, and so following; but I will not eat with
you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is
he comes here?

 Enter Antonio.

BASSANIO.
This is Signior Antonio.

SHYLOCK.
[_Aside._] How like a fawning publican he looks!
I hate him for he is a Christian,
But more for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him!

BASSANIO.
Shylock, do you hear?

SHYLOCK.
I am debating of my present store,
And by the near guess of my memory
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me. But soft! how many months
Do you desire? [_To Antonio._] Rest you fair, good signior,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.

ANTONIO.
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I’ll break a custom. [_To Bassanio._] Is he yet possess’d
How much ye would?

SHYLOCK.
Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.

ANTONIO.
And for three months.

SHYLOCK.
I had forgot, three months, you told me so.
Well then, your bond. And let me see, but hear you,
Methought you said you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

ANTONIO.
I do never use it.

SHYLOCK.
When Jacob graz’d his uncle Laban’s sheep,—
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
As his wise mother wrought in his behalf,
The third possessor; ay, he was the third.

ANTONIO.
And what of him? Did he take interest?

SHYLOCK.
No, not take interest, not, as you would say,
Directly interest; mark what Jacob did.
When Laban and himself were compromis’d
That all the eanlings which were streak’d and pied
Should fall as Jacob’s hire, the ewes being rank
In end of autumn turned to the rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skilful shepherd pill’d me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
Who then conceiving did in eaning time
Fall parti-colour’d lambs, and those were Jacob’s.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

ANTONIO.
This was a venture, sir, that Jacob serv’d for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But sway’d and fashion’d by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?

SHYLOCK.
I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
But note me, signior.

ANTONIO.
Mark you this, Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.
An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!

SHYLOCK.
Three thousand ducats, ’tis a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.

ANTONIO.
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?

SHYLOCK.
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my moneys and my usances.
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
(For suff’rance is the badge of all our tribe.)
You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to, then, you come to me, and you say
“Shylock, we would have moneys.” You say so:
You that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold, moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
“Hath a dog money? Is it possible
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?” Or
Shall I bend low and, in a bondman’s key,
With bated breath and whisp’ring humbleness,
Say this:
“Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last;
You spurn’d me such a day; another time
You call’d me dog; and for these courtesies
I’ll lend you thus much moneys”?

ANTONIO.
I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed for barren metal of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who if he break, thou mayst with better face
Exact the penalty.

SHYLOCK.
Why, look you how you storm!
I would be friends with you, and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have stain’d me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doit
Of usance for my moneys, and you’ll not hear me,
This is kind I offer.

BASSANIO.
This were kindness.

SHYLOCK.
This kindness will I show.
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
Your single bond; and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Express’d in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleaseth me.

ANTONIO.
Content, in faith, I’ll seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

BASSANIO.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me,
I’ll rather dwell in my necessity.

ANTONIO.
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it,
Within these two months, that’s a month before
This bond expires, I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

SHYLOCK.
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others. Pray you, tell me this,
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man’s flesh, taken from a man,
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
To buy his favour, I extend this friendship.
If he will take it, so. If not, adieu,
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.

ANTONIO.
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.

SHYLOCK.
Then meet me forthwith at the notary’s,
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
I’ll be with you.

ANTONIO.
Hie thee, gentle Jew.

 [_Exit Shylock._]

This Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind.

BASSANIO.
I like not fair terms and a villain’s mind.

ANTONIO.
Come on; in this there can be no dismay;
My ships come home a month before the day.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.


 Flourish of cornets. Enter the Prince of Morocco, a tawny Moor all in
 white, and three or four followers accordingly, with Portia, Nerissa
 and their train.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnish’d sun,
To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
Where Phœbus’ fire scarce thaws the icicles,
And let us make incision for your love
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
Hath fear’d the valiant; by my love I swear
The best-regarded virgins of our clime
Have lov’d it too. I would not change this hue,
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.

PORTIA.
In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden’s eyes;
Besides, the lott’ry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
But if my father had not scanted me
And hedg’d me by his wit to yield myself
His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair
As any comer I have look’d on yet
For my affection.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Even for that I thank you.
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets
To try my fortune. By this scimitar
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
I would o’erstare the sternest eyes that look,
Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
And die with grieving.

PORTIA.
You must take your chance,
And either not attempt to choose at all,
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to lady afterward
In way of marriage. Therefore be advis’d.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.

PORTIA.
First, forward to the temple. After dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Good fortune then,
To make me blest or cursed’st among men!

 [_Cornets. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Venice. A street.

 Enter Launcelet Gobbo, the clown, alone.

LAUNCELET.
Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my master.
The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying to me “Gobbo,
Launcelet Gobbo, good Launcelet” or “good Gobbo,” or “good Launcelet
Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.” My conscience says
“No; take heed, honest Launcelet, take heed, honest Gobbo” or, as
aforesaid, “honest Launcelet Gobbo, do not run, scorn running with thy
heels.” Well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack. “Fia!” says the
fiend, “away!” says the fiend. “For the heavens, rouse up a brave
mind,” says the fiend, “and run.” Well, my conscience, hanging about
the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me “My honest friend
Launcelet, being an honest man’s son”—or rather an honest woman’s son,
for indeed my father did something smack, something grow to, he had a
kind of taste;—well, my conscience says “Launcelet, budge not.”
“Budge,” says the fiend. “Budge not,” says my conscience. “Conscience,”
say I, “you counsel well.” “Fiend,” say I, “you counsel well.” To be
ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the Jew my master, who, (God
bless the mark) is a kind of devil; and, to run away from the Jew, I
should be ruled by the fiend, who (saving your reverence) is the devil
himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation, and, in my
conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to
counsel me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly
counsel. I will run, fiend, my heels are at your commandment, I will
run.

 Enter Old Gobbo with a basket.

GOBBO.
Master young man, you, I pray you; which is the way to Master Jew’s?

LAUNCELET.
[_Aside._] O heavens, this is my true-begotten father, who being more
than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not. I will try confusions
with him.

GOBBO.
Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to Master Jew’s?

LAUNCELET.
Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next turning
of all on your left; marry, at the very next turning, turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly to the Jew’s house.

GOBBO.
Be God’s sonties, ’twill be a hard way to hit. Can you tell me whether
one Launcelet, that dwells with him, dwell with him or no?

LAUNCELET.
Talk you of young Master Launcelet? [_Aside._] Mark me now, now will I
raise the waters. Talk you of young Master Launcelet?

GOBBO.
No master, sir, but a poor man’s son, his father, though I say’t, is an
honest exceeding poor man, and, God be thanked, well to live.

LAUNCELET.
Well, let his father be what he will, we talk of young Master
Launcelet.

GOBBO.
Your worship’s friend, and Launcelet, sir.

LAUNCELET.
But I pray you, _ergo_, old man, _ergo_, I beseech you, talk you of
young Master Launcelet?

GOBBO.
Of Launcelet, an’t please your mastership.

LAUNCELET.
_Ergo_, Master Launcelet. Talk not of Master Launcelet, father, for the
young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies, and such odd
sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of learning, is indeed
deceased, or, as you would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.

GOBBO.
Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.

LAUNCELET.
[_Aside._] Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop?
Do you know me, father?

GOBBO.
Alack the day! I know you not, young gentleman, but I pray you tell me,
is my boy, God rest his soul, alive or dead?

LAUNCELET.
Do you not know me, father?

GOBBO.
Alack, sir, I am sand-blind, I know you not.

LAUNCELET.
Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me: it
is a wise father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell
you news of your son. Give me your blessing, truth will come to light,
murder cannot be hid long, a man’s son may, but in the end truth will
out.

GOBBO.
Pray you, sir, stand up, I am sure you are not Launcelet my boy.

LAUNCELET.
Pray you, let’s have no more fooling about it, but give me your
blessing. I am Launcelet, your boy that was, your son that is, your
child that shall be.

GOBBO.
I cannot think you are my son.

LAUNCELET.
I know not what I shall think of that; but I am Launcelet, the Jew’s
man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother.

GOBBO.
Her name is Margery, indeed. I’ll be sworn if thou be Launcelet, thou
art mine own flesh and blood. Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard
hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair on thy chin than Dobbin my
fill-horse has on his tail.

LAUNCELET.
It should seem, then, that Dobbin’s tail grows backward. I am sure he
had more hair on his tail than I have on my face when I last saw him.

GOBBO.
Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou and thy master agree? I have
brought him a present. How ’gree you now?

LAUNCELET.
Well, well. But for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run
away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground. My master’s a
very Jew. Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am famished in his
service. You may tell every finger I have with my ribs. Father, I am
glad you are come, give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who
indeed gives rare new liveries. If I serve not him, I will run as far
as God has any ground. O rare fortune, here comes the man! To him,
father; for I am a Jew, if I serve the Jew any longer.

 Enter Bassanio with Leonardo and a follower or two.

BASSANIO.
You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the
farthest by five of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the
liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging.

 [_Exit a Servant._]

LAUNCELET.
To him, father.

GOBBO.
God bless your worship!

BASSANIO.
Gramercy, wouldst thou aught with me?

GOBBO.
Here’s my son, sir, a poor boy.

LAUNCELET.
Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew’s man, that would, sir, as my
father shall specify.

GOBBO.
He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve.

LAUNCELET.
Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire,
as my father shall specify.

GOBBO.
His master and he (saving your worship’s reverence) are scarce
cater-cousins.

LAUNCELET.
To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done me wrong, doth
cause me, as my father, being I hope an old man, shall frutify unto
you.

GOBBO.
I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and
my suit is—

LAUNCELET.
In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall
know by this honest old man, and though I say it, though old man, yet
poor man, my father.

BASSANIO.
One speak for both. What would you?

LAUNCELET.
Serve you, sir.

GOBBO.
That is the very defect of the matter, sir.

BASSANIO.
I know thee well; thou hast obtain’d thy suit.
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
And hath preferr’d thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jew’s service to become
The follower of so poor a gentleman.

LAUNCELET.
The old proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you,
sir: you have “the grace of God”, sir, and he hath “enough”.

BASSANIO.
Thou speak’st it well. Go, father, with thy son.
Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
My lodging out. [_To a Servant._] Give him a livery
More guarded than his fellows’; see it done.

LAUNCELET.
Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have ne’er a tongue in my
head! [_Looking on his palm._] Well, if any man in Italy have a fairer
table which doth offer to swear upon a book, I shall have good fortune;
go to, here’s a simple line of life. Here’s a small trifle of wives,
alas, fifteen wives is nothing; eleven widows and nine maids is a
simple coming-in for one man. And then to scape drowning thrice, and to
be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed; here are simple
’scapes. Well, if Fortune be a woman, she’s a good wench for this gear.
Father, come; I’ll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.

 [_Exeunt Launcelet and Old Gobbo._]

BASSANIO.
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
These things being bought and orderly bestow’d,
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight
My best esteem’d acquaintance; hie thee, go.

LEONARDO.
My best endeavours shall be done herein.

 Enter Gratiano.

GRATIANO.
Where’s your master?

LEONARDO.
Yonder, sir, he walks.

 [_Exit._]

GRATIANO.
Signior Bassanio!

BASSANIO.
Gratiano!

GRATIANO.
I have suit to you.

BASSANIO.
You have obtain’d it.

GRATIANO.
You must not deny me, I must go with you to Belmont.

BASSANIO.
Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude, and bold of voice,
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults;
But where thou art not known, why there they show
Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behaviour
I be misconst’red in the place I go to,
And lose my hopes.

GRATIANO.
Signior Bassanio, hear me.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh, and say “amen”;
Use all the observance of civility
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his grandam, never trust me more.

BASSANIO.
Well, we shall see your bearing.

GRATIANO.
Nay, but I bar tonight, you shall not gauge me
By what we do tonight.

BASSANIO.
No, that were pity.
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment. But fare you well,
I have some business.

GRATIANO.
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest,
But we will visit you at supper-time.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A room in Shylock’s house.

 Enter Jessica and Launcelet.

JESSICA.
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil,
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
And, Launcelet, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new master’s guest.
Give him this letter, do it secretly.
And so farewell. I would not have my father
See me in talk with thee.

LAUNCELET.
Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful pagan, most sweet Jew!
If a Christian do not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.
But, adieu! These foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit.
Adieu!

JESSICA.
Farewell, good Launcelet.

 [_Exit Launcelet._]

Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my father’s child!
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. The same. A street.

 Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino and Solanio.

LORENZO.
Nay, we will slink away in supper-time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return
All in an hour.

GRATIANO.
We have not made good preparation.

SALARINO.
We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers.

SOLANIO.
’Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly order’d,
And better in my mind not undertook.

LORENZO.
’Tis now but four o’clock, we have two hours
To furnish us.

 Enter Launcelet with a letter.

Friend Launcelet, what’s the news?

LAUNCELET.
And it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.

LORENZO.
I know the hand, in faith ’tis a fair hand,
And whiter than the paper it writ on
Is the fair hand that writ.

GRATIANO.
Love news, in faith.

LAUNCELET.
By your leave, sir.

LORENZO.
Whither goest thou?

LAUNCELET.
Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to sup tonight with my new
master the Christian.

LORENZO.
Hold here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica
I will not fail her, speak it privately.
Go, gentlemen,

 [_Exit Launcelet._]

Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
I am provided of a torch-bearer.

SALARINO.
Ay, marry, I’ll be gone about it straight.

SOLANIO.
And so will I.

LORENZO.
Meet me and Gratiano
At Gratiano’s lodging some hour hence.

SALARINO.
’Tis good we do so.

 [_Exeunt Salarino and Solanio._]

GRATIANO.
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?

LORENZO.
I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
How I shall take her from her father’s house,
What gold and jewels she is furnish’d with,
What page’s suit she hath in readiness.
If e’er the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughter’s sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
Come, go with me, peruse this as thou goest;
Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The same. Before Shylock’s house.

 Enter Shylock the Jew and Launcelet his man that was the clown.

SHYLOCK.
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.—
What, Jessica!—Thou shalt not gormandize
As thou hast done with me;—What, Jessica!—
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.
Why, Jessica, I say!

LAUNCELET.
Why, Jessica!

SHYLOCK.
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

LAUNCELET.
Your worship was wont to tell me I could do nothing without bidding.

 Enter Jessica.

JESSICA.
Call you? What is your will?

SHYLOCK.
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica.
There are my keys. But wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love, they flatter me.
But yet I’ll go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian. Jessica, my girl,
Look to my house. I am right loath to go;
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
For I did dream of money-bags tonight.

LAUNCELET.
I beseech you, sir, go. My young master doth expect your reproach.

SHYLOCK.
So do I his.

LAUNCELET.
And they have conspired together. I will not say you shall see a
masque, but if you do, then it was not for nothing that my nose fell
a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o’clock i’ th’ morning, falling
out that year on Ash-Wednesday was four year in th’ afternoon.

SHYLOCK.
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-neck’d fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnish’d faces,
But stop my house’s ears, I mean my casements.
Let not the sound of shallow fopp’ry enter
My sober house. By Jacob’s staff I swear
I have no mind of feasting forth tonight.
But I will go. Go you before me, sirrah.
Say I will come.

LAUNCELET.
I will go before, sir.
Mistress, look out at window for all this.
    There will come a Christian by
    Will be worth a Jewess’ eye.

 [_Exit Launcelet._]

SHYLOCK.
What says that fool of Hagar’s offspring, ha?

JESSICA.
His words were “Farewell, mistress,” nothing else.

SHYLOCK.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
More than the wild-cat. Drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in.
Perhaps I will return immediately:
Do as I bid you, shut doors after you,
“Fast bind, fast find.”
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.

 [_Exit._]

JESSICA.
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost,
I have a father, you a daughter, lost.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VI. The same.

 Enter the masquers, Gratiano and Salarino.

GRATIANO.
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make stand.

SALARINO.
His hour is almost past.

GRATIANO.
And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

SALARINO.
O ten times faster Venus’ pigeons fly
To seal love’s bonds new-made than they are wont
To keep obliged faith unforfeited!

GRATIANO.
That ever holds: who riseth from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that doth untread again
His tedious measures with the unbated fire
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoy’d.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind!
How like the prodigal doth she return
With over-weather’d ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggar’d by the strumpet wind!

 Enter Lorenzo.

SALARINO.
Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.

LORENZO.
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.
Not I but my affairs have made you wait.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
I’ll watch as long for you then. Approach.
Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who’s within?

 Enter Jessica above, in boy’s clothes.

JESSICA.
Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty,
Albeit I’ll swear that I do know your tongue.

LORENZO.
Lorenzo, and thy love.

JESSICA.
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? And now who knows
But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?

LORENZO.
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

JESSICA.
Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
I am glad ’tis night, you do not look on me,
For I am much asham’d of my exchange.
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.

LORENZO.
Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.

JESSICA.
What! must I hold a candle to my shames?
They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
Why, ’tis an office of discovery, love,
And I should be obscur’d.

LORENZO.
So are you, sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
But come at once,
For the close night doth play the runaway,
And we are stay’d for at Bassanio’s feast.

JESSICA.
I will make fast the doors, and gild myself
With some moe ducats, and be with you straight.

 [_Exit above._]

GRATIANO.
Now, by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.

LORENZO.
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath prov’d herself.
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

 Enter Jessica.

What, art thou come? On, gentlemen, away!
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.

 [_Exit with Jessica and Salarino._]

 Enter Antonio.

ANTONIO.
Who’s there?

GRATIANO.
Signior Antonio!

ANTONIO.
Fie, fie, Gratiano! where are all the rest?
’Tis nine o’clock, our friends all stay for you.
No masque tonight, the wind is come about;
Bassanio presently will go aboard.
I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

GRATIANO.
I am glad on’t. I desire no more delight
Than to be under sail and gone tonight.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter Portia with the Prince of Morocco and both
 their trains.

PORTIA.
Go, draw aside the curtains and discover
The several caskets to this noble prince.
Now make your choice.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
The first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
“Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.”
How shall I know if I do choose the right?

PORTIA.
The one of them contains my picture, prince.
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see.
I will survey the inscriptions back again.
What says this leaden casket?
“Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.”
Must give, for what? For lead? Hazard for lead!
This casket threatens; men that hazard all
Do it in hope of fair advantages:
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross,
I’ll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
And weigh thy value with an even hand.
If thou be’st rated by thy estimation
Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the lady.
And yet to be afeard of my deserving
Were but a weak disabling of myself.
As much as I deserve! Why, that’s the lady:
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding;
But more than these, in love I do deserve.
What if I stray’d no farther, but chose here?
Let’s see once more this saying grav’d in gold:
“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”
Why, that’s the lady, all the world desires her.
From the four corners of the earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint.
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
For princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As o’er a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is’t like that lead contains her? ’Twere damnation
To think so base a thought. It were too gross
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
Or shall I think in silver she’s immur’d
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an angel
Stamped in gold; but that’s insculp’d upon;
But here an angel in a golden bed
Lies all within. Deliver me the key.
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

PORTIA.
There, take it, prince, and if my form lie there,
Then I am yours.

 [_He unlocks the golden casket._]

PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
O hell! what have we here?
A carrion Death, within whose empty eye
There is a written scroll. I’ll read the writing.

     _All that glisters is not gold,
     Often have you heard that told.
     Many a man his life hath sold
     But my outside to behold.
     Gilded tombs do worms infold.
     Had you been as wise as bold,
     Young in limbs, in judgment old,
     Your answer had not been inscroll’d,
     Fare you well, your suit is cold._

   Cold indeed and labour lost,
   Then farewell heat, and welcome frost.
Portia, adieu! I have too griev’d a heart
To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.

 [_Exit with his train. Flourish of cornets._]

PORTIA.
A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
Let all of his complexion choose me so.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Venice. A street.

 Enter Salarino and Solanio.

SALARINO.
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

SOLANIO.
The villain Jew with outcries rais’d the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio’s ship.

SALARINO.
He came too late, the ship was under sail;
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a gondola were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica.
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

SOLANIO.
I never heard a passion so confus’d,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
“My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice! the law! my ducats and my daughter!
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stol’n from me by my daughter!
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stol’n by my daughter! Justice! find the girl,
She hath the stones upon her and the ducats.”

SALARINO.
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.

SOLANIO.
Let good Antonio look he keep his day
Or he shall pay for this.

SALARINO.
Marry, well rememb’red.
I reason’d with a Frenchman yesterday,
Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught.
I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
And wish’d in silence that it were not his.

SOLANIO.
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear,
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

SALARINO.
A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part,
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return. He answered “Do not so,
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time,
And for the Jew’s bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love:
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there.”
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanio’s hand, and so they parted.

SOLANIO.
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.

SALARINO.
Do we so.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IX. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Nerissa and a Servitor.

NERISSA.
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight.
The Prince of Arragon hath ta’en his oath,
And comes to his election presently.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter the Prince of Arragon, his train, and
 Portia.

PORTIA.
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince,
If you choose that wherein I am contain’d,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz’d.
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

ARRAGON.
I am enjoin’d by oath to observe three things:
First, never to unfold to anyone
Which casket ’twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage;
Lastly,
If I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you and be gone.

PORTIA.
To these injunctions everyone doth swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

ARRAGON.
And so have I address’d me. Fortune now
To my heart’s hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
“Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.”
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest? Ha! let me see:
“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”
What many men desire! that “many” may be meant
By the fool multitude, that choose by show,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
Which pries not to th’ interior, but like the martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and road of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not jump with common spirits
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house,
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
And well said too; for who shall go about
To cozen fortune, and be honourable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.
O that estates, degrees, and offices
Were not deriv’d corruptly, and that clear honour
Were purchas’d by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honour? And how much honour
Pick’d from the chaff and ruin of the times,
To be new varnish’d? Well, but to my choice.
“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.”
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.

 [_He opens the silver casket._]

PORTIA.
Too long a pause for that which you find there.

ARRAGON.
What’s here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.
How much unlike art thou to Portia!
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings!
“Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.”
Did I deserve no more than a fool’s head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?

PORTIA.
To offend and judge are distinct offices,
And of opposed natures.

ARRAGON.
What is here?

     _The fire seven times tried this;
     Seven times tried that judgment is
     That did never choose amiss.
     Some there be that shadows kiss;
     Such have but a shadow’s bliss.
     There be fools alive, I wis,
     Silver’d o’er, and so was this.
     Take what wife you will to bed,
     I will ever be your head:
     So be gone; you are sped._

Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here.
With one fool’s head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet, adieu! I’ll keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroth.

 [_Exit Arragon with his train._]

PORTIA.
Thus hath the candle sing’d the moth.
O, these deliberate fools! When they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

NERISSA.
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.

PORTIA.
Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Where is my lady?

PORTIA.
Here. What would my lord?

MESSENGER.
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify th’ approaching of his lord,
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath)
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet,
To show how costly summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

PORTIA.
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend’st such high-day wit in praising him.
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupid’s post that comes so mannerly.

NERISSA.
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Venice. A street.


 Enter Solanio and Salarino.

SOLANIO.
Now, what news on the Rialto?

SALARINO.
Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio hath a ship of rich
lading wrack’d on the narrow seas; the Goodwins, I think they call the
place, a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the carcasses of many a
tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip Report be an honest
woman of her word.

SOLANIO.
I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or
made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a third husband.
But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain
highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the honest Antonio,—O that I
had a title good enough to keep his name company!—

SALARINO.
Come, the full stop.

SOLANIO.
Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a ship.

SALARINO.
I would it might prove the end of his losses.

SOLANIO.
Let me say “amen” betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he
comes in the likeness of a Jew.

 Enter Shylock.

How now, Shylock, what news among the merchants?

SHYLOCK.
You knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my daughter’s flight.

SALARINO.
That’s certain, I, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she
flew withal.

SOLANIO.
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged; and then it
is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.

SHYLOCK.
She is damn’d for it.

SALARINO.
That’s certain, if the devil may be her judge.

SHYLOCK.
My own flesh and blood to rebel!

SOLANIO.
Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?

SHYLOCK.
I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.

SALARINO.
There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet
and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and
Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at
sea or no?

SHYLOCK.
There I have another bad match, a bankrupt, a prodigal, who dare scarce
show his head on the Rialto, a beggar that used to come so smug upon
the mart; let him look to his bond. He was wont to call me usurer; let
him look to his bond: he was wont to lend money for a Christian cur’sy;
let him look to his bond.

SALARINO.
Why, I am sure if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his flesh! What’s that
good for?

SHYLOCK.
To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my
revenge. He hath disgrac’d me and hind’red me half a million, laugh’d
at my losses, mock’d at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my
bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies. And what’s his
reason? I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs,
dimensions, senses, affections, passions? Fed with the same food, hurt
with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same
means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a Christian
is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not
laugh? If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we
not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in
that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? Revenge. If a
Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian
example? Why, revenge! The villainy you teach me I will execute, and it
shall go hard but I will better the instruction.

 Enter a man from Antonio.

SERVANT.
Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house, and desires to speak with
you both.

SALARINO.
We have been up and down to seek him.

 Enter Tubal.

SOLANIO.
Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be match’d, unless the
devil himself turn Jew.

 [_Exeunt Solanio, Salarino and the Servant._]

SHYLOCK.
How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa? Hast thou found my daughter?

TUBAL.
I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.

SHYLOCK.
Why there, there, there, there! A diamond gone cost me two thousand
ducats in Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our nation till now, I
never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in that, and other
precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot,
and the jewels in her ear; would she were hearsed at my foot, and the
ducats in her coffin. No news of them? Why so? And I know not what’s
spent in the search. Why, thou—loss upon loss! The thief gone with so
much, and so much to find the thief, and no satisfaction, no revenge,
nor no ill luck stirring but what lights o’ my shoulders, no sighs but
o’ my breathing, no tears but o’ my shedding.

TUBAL.
Yes, other men have ill luck too. Antonio, as I heard in Genoa—

SHYLOCK.
What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?

TUBAL.
—hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.

SHYLOCK.
I thank God! I thank God! Is it true, is it true?

TUBAL.
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack.

SHYLOCK.
I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa?

TUBAL.
Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one night, fourscore ducats.

SHYLOCK.
Thou stick’st a dagger in me. I shall never see my gold again.
Fourscore ducats at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!

TUBAL.
There came divers of Antonio’s creditors in my company to Venice that
swear he cannot choose but break.

SHYLOCK.
I am very glad of it. I’ll plague him, I’ll torture him. I am glad of
it.

TUBAL.
One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.

SHYLOCK.
Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my turquoise, I had it
of Leah when I was a bachelor. I would not have given it for a
wilderness of monkeys.

TUBAL.
But Antonio is certainly undone.

SHYLOCK.
Nay, that’s true, that’s very true. Go, Tubal, fee me an officer;
bespeak him a fortnight before. I will have the heart of him if he
forfeit, for were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good Tubal, at our
synagogue, Tubal.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Bassanio, Portia, Gratiano, Nerissa and all their trains.

PORTIA.
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
There’s something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you, and you know yourself
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
But lest you should not understand me well,—
And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought,—
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.
So will I never be. So may you miss me.
But if you do, you’ll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o’erlook’d me and divided me.
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours. O these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights!
And so though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but ’tis to peise the time,
To eche it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

BASSANIO.
Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

PORTIA.
Upon the rack, Bassanio! Then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

BASSANIO.
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th’ enjoying of my love.
There may as well be amity and life
’Tween snow and fire as treason and my love.

PORTIA.
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
Where men enforced do speak anything.

BASSANIO.
Promise me life, and I’ll confess the truth.

PORTIA.
Well then, confess and live.

BASSANIO.
“Confess and love”
Had been the very sum of my confession:
O happy torment, when my torturer
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

PORTIA.
Away, then! I am lock’d in one of them.
If you do love me, you will find me out.
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Let music sound while he doth make his choice.
Then if he lose he makes a swan-like end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And wat’ry death-bed for him. He may win,
And what is music then? Then music is
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
To a new-crowned monarch. Such it is
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom’s ear
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
With no less presence, but with much more love
Than young Alcides when he did redeem
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
To the sea-monster: I stand for sacrifice;
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
With bleared visages come forth to view
The issue of th’ exploit. Go, Hercules!
Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
I view the fight than thou that mak’st the fray.

 A song, whilst Bassanio comments on the caskets to himself.

     _Tell me where is fancy bred,
     Or in the heart or in the head?
     How begot, how nourished?
        Reply, reply.
     It is engend’red in the eyes,
     With gazing fed, and fancy dies
     In the cradle where it lies.
        Let us all ring fancy’s knell:
        I’ll begin it.—Ding, dong, bell._

ALL.
     _Ding, dong, bell._

BASSANIO.
So may the outward shows be least themselves.
The world is still deceiv’d with ornament.
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
But, being season’d with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
What damned error but some sober brow
Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
There is no vice so simple but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward search’d, have livers white as milk,
And these assume but valour’s excrement
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see ’tis purchas’d by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
So are those crisped snaky golden locks
Which make such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore thou gaudy gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee,
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
’Tween man and man: but thou, thou meagre lead,
Which rather threaten’st than dost promise aught,
Thy palenness moves me more than eloquence,
And here choose I, joy be the consequence!

PORTIA.
[_Aside._] How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embrac’d despair,
And shudd’ring fear, and green-ey’d jealousy.
O love, be moderate; allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy; scant this excess!
I feel too much thy blessing, make it less,
For fear I surfeit.

BASSANIO.
What find I here? [_Opening the leaden casket_.]
Fair Portia’s counterfeit! What demi-god
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine,
Seem they in motion? Here are sever’d lips,
Parted with sugar breath, so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
A golden mesh t’entrap the hearts of men
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes!—
How could he see to do them? Having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave itself unfurnish’d. Yet look how far
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
In underprizing it, so far this shadow
Doth limp behind the substance. Here’s the scroll,
The continent and summary of my fortune.

     _You that choose not by the view
     Chance as fair and choose as true!
     Since this fortune falls to you,
     Be content and seek no new.
     If you be well pleas’d with this,
     And hold your fortune for your bliss,
     Turn to where your lady is,
     And claim her with a loving kiss._

A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave, [_Kissing her_.]
I come by note to give and to receive.
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he hath done well in people’s eyes,
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peals of praise be his or no,
So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirm’d, sign’d, ratified by you.

PORTIA.
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
Such as I am; though for myself alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish
To wish myself much better, yet for you
I would be trebled twenty times myself,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich,
That only to stand high in your account,
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account. But the full sum of me
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,
Is an unlesson’d girl, unschool’d, unpractis’d;
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn; happier than this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits itself to yours to be directed,
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen o’er myself; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours,—my lord’s. I give them with this ring,
Which when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

BASSANIO.
Madam, you have bereft me of all words,
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved prince, there doth appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together,
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Express’d and not express’d. But when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
O then be bold to say Bassanio’s dead!

NERISSA.
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry, good joy. Good joy, my lord and lady!

GRATIANO.
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish;
For I am sure you can wish none from me.
And when your honours mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.

BASSANIO.
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.

GRATIANO.
I thank your lordship, you have got me one.
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid.
You lov’d, I lov’d; for intermission
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine too, as the matter falls.
For wooing here until I sweat again,
And swearing till my very roof was dry
With oaths of love, at last, (if promise last)
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love, provided that your fortune
Achiev’d her mistress.

PORTIA.
Is this true, Nerissa?

NERISSA.
Madam, it is, so you stand pleas’d withal.

BASSANIO.
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?

GRATIANO.
Yes, faith, my lord.

BASSANIO.
Our feast shall be much honoured in your marriage.

GRATIANO.
We’ll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.

NERISSA.
What! and stake down?

GRATIANO.
No, we shall ne’er win at that sport and stake down.
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old Venetian friend, Salerio!

 Enter Lorenzo, Jessica and Salerio.

BASSANIO.
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
If that the youth of my new int’rest here
Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave,
I bid my very friends and countrymen,
Sweet Portia, welcome.

PORTIA.
So do I, my lord,
They are entirely welcome.

LORENZO.
I thank your honour. For my part, my lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me, past all saying nay,
To come with him along.

SALERIO.
I did, my lord,
And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio
Commends him to you.

 [_Gives Bassanio a letter._]

BASSANIO.
Ere I ope his letter,
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.

SALERIO.
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there
Will show you his estate.

 [_Bassanio opens the letter._]

GRATIANO.
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.
Your hand, Salerio. What’s the news from Venice?
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
I know he will be glad of our success.
We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.

SALERIO.
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.

PORTIA.
There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper
That steals the colour from Bassanio’s cheek.
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,
And I must freely have the half of anything
That this same paper brings you.

BASSANIO.
O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins, I was a gentleman.
And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady,
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a braggart. When I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
I have engag’d myself to a dear friend,
Engag’d my friend to his mere enemy,
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio?
Hath all his ventures fail’d? What, not one hit?
From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel scape the dreadful touch
Of merchant-marring rocks?

SALERIO.
Not one, my lord.
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it. Never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

JESSICA.
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
That he would rather have Antonio’s flesh
Than twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him. And I know, my lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Antonio.

PORTIA.
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

BASSANIO.
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best condition’d and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies, and one in whom
The ancient Roman honour more appears
Than any that draws breath in Italy.

PORTIA.
What sum owes he the Jew?

BASSANIO.
For me three thousand ducats.

PORTIA.
What, no more?
Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond.
Double six thousand, and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio’s fault.
First go with me to church and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend.
For never shall you lie by Portia’s side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime,
Will live as maids and widows. Come, away!
For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.

BASSANIO.
_Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my creditors grow cruel,
my estate is very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit, and since in
paying it, it is impossible I should live, all debts are clear’d
between you and I, if I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding,
use your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to come, let not my
letter._

PORTIA.
O love, dispatch all business and be gone!

BASSANIO.
Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make haste; but, till I come again,
No bed shall e’er be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interposer ’twixt us twain.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Venice. A street.

 Enter Shylock, Salarino, Antonio and Gaoler.

SHYLOCK.
Gaoler, look to him. Tell not me of mercy.
This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Gaoler, look to him.

ANTONIO.
Hear me yet, good Shylock.

SHYLOCK.
I’ll have my bond, speak not against my bond.
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.
Thou call’dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs;
The Duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder,
Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.

ANTONIO.
I pray thee hear me speak.

SHYLOCK.
I’ll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak.
I’ll have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I’ll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors. Follow not,
I’ll have no speaking, I will have my bond.

 [_Exit._]

SALARINO.
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.

ANTONIO.
Let him alone.
I’ll follow him no more with bootless prayers.
He seeks my life, his reason well I know:
I oft deliver’d from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me.
Therefore he hates me.

SALARINO.
I am sure the Duke
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.

ANTONIO.
The Duke cannot deny the course of law,
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
’Twill much impeach the justice of the state,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go.
These griefs and losses have so bated me
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.
Well, gaoler, on, pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Belmont. A room in Portia’s house.

 Enter Portia, Nerissa, Lorenzo, Jessica and Balthazar.

LORENZO.
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honour,
How true a gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Than customary bounty can enforce you.

PORTIA.
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now; for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Antonio,
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul
From out the state of hellish cruelty!
This comes too near the praising of myself;
Therefore no more of it. Hear other things.
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
The husbandry and manage of my house
Until my lord’s return. For mine own part,
I have toward heaven breath’d a secret vow
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord’s return.
There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.

LORENZO.
Madam, with all my heart
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

PORTIA.
My people do already know my mind,
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
So fare you well till we shall meet again.

LORENZO.
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!

JESSICA.
I wish your ladyship all heart’s content.

PORTIA.
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleas’d
To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.

 [_Exeunt Jessica and Lorenzo._]

Now, Balthazar,
As I have ever found thee honest-true,
So let me find thee still. Take this same letter,
And use thou all th’ endeavour of a man
In speed to Padua, see thou render this
Into my cousin’s hands, Doctor Bellario;
And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagin’d speed
Unto the traject, to the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.

BALTHAZAR.
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.

 [_Exit._]

PORTIA.
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of; we’ll see our husbands
Before they think of us.

NERISSA.
Shall they see us?

PORTIA.
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. I’ll hold thee any wager,
When we are both accoutered like young men,
I’ll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice; and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride; and speak of frays
Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lies
How honourable ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died;
I could not do withal. Then I’ll repent,
And wish for all that, that I had not kill’d them.
And twenty of these puny lies I’ll tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
About a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
Which I will practise.

NERISSA.
Why, shall we turn to men?

PORTIA.
Fie, what a question’s that,
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
But come, I’ll tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles today.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The same. A garden.

 Enter Launcelet and Jessica.

LAUNCELET.
Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon
the children, therefore, I promise you, I fear you. I was always plain
with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter. Therefore be
of good cheer, for truly I think you are damn’d. There is but one hope
in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope
neither.

JESSICA.
And what hope is that, I pray thee?

LAUNCELET.
Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are
not the Jew’s daughter.

JESSICA.
That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so the sins of my mother
should be visited upon me.

LAUNCELET.
Truly then I fear you are damn’d both by father and mother; thus when I
shun Scylla your father, I fall into Charybdis your mother. Well, you
are gone both ways.

JESSICA.
I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made me a Christian.

LAUNCELET.
Truly the more to blame he, we were Christians enow before, e’en as
many as could well live one by another. This making of Christians will
raise the price of hogs; if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not
shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.

 Enter Lorenzo.

JESSICA.
I’ll tell my husband, Launcelet, what you say. Here he comes.

LORENZO.
I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelet, if you thus get my wife
into corners!

JESSICA.
Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Launcelet and I are out. He tells
me flatly there’s no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a Jew’s
daughter; and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for
in converting Jews to Christians you raise the price of pork.

LORENZO.
I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting
up of the negro’s belly! The Moor is with child by you, Launcelet.

LAUNCELET.
It is much that the Moor should be more than reason; but if she be less
than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

LORENZO.
How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best grace of wit
will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none
only but parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them prepare for dinner.

LAUNCELET.
That is done, sir, they have all stomachs.

LORENZO.
Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them prepare dinner.

LAUNCELET.
That is done too, sir, only “cover” is the word.

LORENZO.
Will you cover, then, sir?

LAUNCELET.
Not so, sir, neither. I know my duty.

LORENZO.
Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show the whole wealth of
thy wit in an instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his plain
meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the
meat, and we will come in to dinner.

LAUNCELET.
For the table, sir, it shall be served in; for the meat, sir, it shall
be covered; for your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as
humours and conceits shall govern.

 [_Exit._]

LORENZO.
O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words, and I do know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnish’d like him, that for a tricksy word
Defy the matter. How cheer’st thou, Jessica?
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion,
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio’s wife?

JESSICA.
Past all expressing. It is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
For having such a blessing in his lady,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth,
And if on earth he do not merit it,
In reason he should never come to heaven.
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one, there must be something else
Pawn’d with the other, for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.

LORENZO.
Even such a husband
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

JESSICA.
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that.

LORENZO.
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.

JESSICA.
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.

LORENZO.
No pray thee, let it serve for table-talk.
Then howsome’er thou speak’st, ’mong other things
I shall digest it.

JESSICA.
Well, I’ll set you forth.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Venice. A court of justice.


 Enter the Duke, the Magnificoes, Antonio, Bassanio, Gratiano, Salerio
 and others.

DUKE.
What, is Antonio here?

ANTONIO.
Ready, so please your Grace.

DUKE.
I am sorry for thee, thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,
Uncapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.

ANTONIO.
I have heard
Your Grace hath ta’en great pains to qualify
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his envy’s reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am arm’d
To suffer with a quietness of spirit
The very tyranny and rage of his.

DUKE.
Go one and call the Jew into the court.

SALARINO.
He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.

 Enter Shylock.

DUKE.
Make room, and let him stand before our face.
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then, ’tis thought,
Thou’lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant’s flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But, touch’d with human gentleness and love,
Forgive a moiety of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so huddled on his back,
Enow to press a royal merchant down,
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
From stubborn Turks and Tartars never train’d
To offices of tender courtesy.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.

SHYLOCK.
I have possess’d your Grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter and your city’s freedom!
You’ll ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
Three thousand ducats. I’ll not answer that,
But say it is my humour. Is it answer’d?
What if my house be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleas’d to give ten thousand ducats
To have it ban’d? What, are you answer’d yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
And others, when the bagpipe sings i’ the nose,
Cannot contain their urine; for affection
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be render’d
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig,
Why he a harmless necessary cat,
Why he a woollen bagpipe, but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame
As to offend, himself being offended,
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More than a lodg’d hate and a certain loathing
I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
A losing suit against him. Are you answered?

BASSANIO.
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

SHYLOCK.
I am not bound to please thee with my answer.

BASSANIO.
Do all men kill the things they do not love?

SHYLOCK.
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?

BASSANIO.
Every offence is not a hate at first.

SHYLOCK.
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?

ANTONIO.
I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
You may as well go stand upon the beach
And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
You may as well use question with the wolf,
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops and to make no noise
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
You may as well do anything most hard
As seek to soften that—than which what’s harder?—
His Jewish heart. Therefore, I do beseech you,
Make no moe offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conveniency.
Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.

BASSANIO.
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

SHYLOCK.
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them, I would have my bond.

DUKE.
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend’ring none?

SHYLOCK.
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchas’d slave,
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts,
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you
“Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
Be season’d with such viands”? You will answer
“The slaves are ours.” So do I answer you:
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought; ’tis mine and I will have it.
If you deny me, fie upon your law!
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
I stand for judgment. Answer; shall I have it?

DUKE.
Upon my power I may dismiss this court,
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.

SALARINO.
My lord, here stays without
A messenger with letters from the doctor,
New come from Padua.

DUKE.
Bring us the letters. Call the messenger.

BASSANIO.
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.

ANTONIO.
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meetest for death, the weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
You cannot better be employ’d, Bassanio,
Than to live still, and write mine epitaph.

 Enter Nerissa dressed like a lawyer’s clerk.

DUKE.
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?

NERISSA.
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.

 [_Presents a letter._]

BASSANIO.
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

SHYLOCK.
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.

GRATIANO.
Not on thy sole but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
Thou mak’st thy knife keen. But no metal can,
No, not the hangman’s axe, bear half the keenness
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?

SHYLOCK.
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.

GRATIANO.
O, be thou damn’d, inexecrable dog!
And for thy life let justice be accus’d;
Thou almost mak’st me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
Govern’d a wolf who, hang’d for human slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infus’d itself in thee; for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starv’d and ravenous.

SHYLOCK.
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offend’st thy lungs to speak so loud.
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.

DUKE.
This letter from Bellario doth commend
A young and learned doctor to our court.
Where is he?

NERISSA.
He attendeth here hard by,
To know your answer, whether you’ll admit him.

DUKE OF VENICE.
With all my heart: some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
Meantime, the court shall hear Bellario’s letter.

[_Reads._] _Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt of your
letter I am very sick, but in the instant that your messenger came, in
loving visitation was with me a young doctor of Rome. His name is
Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause in controversy between the
Jew and Antonio the merchant. We turn’d o’er many books together. He is
furnished with my opinion, which, bettered with his own learning (the
greatness whereof I cannot enough commend), comes with him at my
importunity to fill up your Grace’s request in my stead. I beseech you
let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend
estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so old a head. I
leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish
his commendation._

You hear the learn’d Bellario what he writes,
And here, I take it, is the doctor come.

 Enter Portia dressed like a doctor of laws.

Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?

PORTIA.
I did, my lord.

DUKE.
You are welcome. Take your place.
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the court?

PORTIA.
I am informed throughly of the cause.
Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?

DUKE.
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.

PORTIA.
Is your name Shylock?

SHYLOCK.
Shylock is my name.

PORTIA.
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
[_To Antonio_.] You stand within his danger, do you not?

ANTONIO.
Ay, so he says.

PORTIA.
Do you confess the bond?

ANTONIO.
I do.

PORTIA.
Then must the Jew be merciful.

SHYLOCK.
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

PORTIA.
The quality of mercy is not strain’d,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest,
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
’Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown.
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty,
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest God’s
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
Must needs give sentence ’gainst the merchant there.

SHYLOCK.
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

PORTIA.
Is he not able to discharge the money?

BASSANIO.
Yes, here I tender it for him in the court,
Yea, twice the sum, if that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times o’er
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart.
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you,
Wrest once the law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.

PORTIA.
It must not be, there is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established;
’Twill be recorded for a precedent,
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.

SHYLOCK.
A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel!
O wise young judge, how I do honour thee!

PORTIA.
I pray you let me look upon the bond.

SHYLOCK.
Here ’tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.

PORTIA.
Shylock, there’s thrice thy money offered thee.

SHYLOCK.
An oath, an oath! I have an oath in heaven.
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice.

PORTIA.
Why, this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the merchant’s heart. Be merciful,
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.

SHYLOCK.
When it is paid according to the tenour.
It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
You know the law; your exposition
Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law,
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay here on my bond.

ANTONIO.
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.

PORTIA.
Why then, thus it is:
You must prepare your bosom for his knife.

SHYLOCK.
O noble judge! O excellent young man!

PORTIA.
For the intent and purpose of the law
Hath full relation to the penalty,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond.

SHYLOCK.
’Tis very true. O wise and upright judge,
How much more elder art thou than thy looks!

PORTIA.
Therefore lay bare your bosom.

SHYLOCK.
Ay, his breast
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge?
“Nearest his heart”: those are the very words.

PORTIA.
It is so. Are there balance here to weigh
The flesh?

SHYLOCK.
I have them ready.

PORTIA.
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

SHYLOCK.
Is it so nominated in the bond?

PORTIA.
It is not so express’d, but what of that?
’Twere good you do so much for charity.

SHYLOCK.
I cannot find it; ’tis not in the bond.

PORTIA.
You, merchant, have you anything to say?

ANTONIO.
But little. I am arm’d and well prepar’d.
Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well,
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you,
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
Than is her custom: it is still her use
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty, from which ling’ring penance
Of such misery doth she cut me off.
Commend me to your honourable wife,
Tell her the process of Antonio’s end,
Say how I lov’d you, speak me fair in death.
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge
Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I’ll pay it instantly with all my heart.

BASSANIO.
Antonio, I am married to a wife
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
But life itself, my wife, and all the world,
Are not with me esteem’d above thy life.
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

PORTIA.
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.

GRATIANO.
I have a wife who I protest I love.
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

NERISSA.
’Tis well you offer it behind her back,
The wish would make else an unquiet house.

SHYLOCK.
These be the Christian husbands! I have a daughter—
Would any of the stock of Barabbas
Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!
We trifle time, I pray thee, pursue sentence.

PORTIA.
A pound of that same merchant’s flesh is thine,
The court awards it and the law doth give it.

SHYLOCK.
Most rightful judge!

PORTIA.
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast.
The law allows it and the court awards it.

SHYLOCK.
Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare.

PORTIA.
Tarry a little, there is something else.
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
The words expressly are “a pound of flesh”:
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.

GRATIANO.
O upright judge! Mark, Jew. O learned judge!

SHYLOCK.
Is that the law?

PORTIA.
Thyself shalt see the act.
For, as thou urgest justice, be assur’d
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir’st.

GRATIANO.
O learned judge! Mark, Jew, a learned judge!

SHYLOCK.
I take this offer then. Pay the bond thrice
And let the Christian go.

BASSANIO.
Here is the money.

PORTIA.
Soft!
The Jew shall have all justice. Soft! no haste!
He shall have nothing but the penalty.

GRATIANO.
O Jew, an upright judge, a learned judge!

PORTIA.
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more,
But just a pound of flesh: if thou tak’st more
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple, nay, if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

GRATIANO.
A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.

PORTIA.
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

SHYLOCK.
Give me my principal, and let me go.

BASSANIO.
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

PORTIA.
He hath refus’d it in the open court,
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

GRATIANO.
A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel!
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

SHYLOCK.
Shall I not have barely my principal?

PORTIA.
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

SHYLOCK.
Why, then the devil give him good of it!
I’ll stay no longer question.

PORTIA.
Tarry, Jew.
The law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien
That by direct or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any citizen,
The party ’gainst the which he doth contrive
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
And the offender’s life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, ’gainst all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou stand’st;
For it appears by manifest proceeding
That indirectly, and directly too,
Thou hast contrived against the very life
Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr’d
The danger formerly by me rehears’d.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

GRATIANO.
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself,
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
Therefore thou must be hang’d at the state’s charge.

DUKE.
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio’s;
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

PORTIA.
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.

SHYLOCK.
Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that.
You take my house when you do take the prop
That doth sustain my house; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.

PORTIA.
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?

GRATIANO.
A halter gratis, nothing else, for God’s sake!

ANTONIO.
So please my lord the Duke and all the court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content, so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more, that for this favour,
He presently become a Christian;
The other, that he do record a gift,
Here in the court, of all he dies possess’d
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

DUKE.
He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

PORTIA.
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?

SHYLOCK.
I am content.

PORTIA.
Clerk, draw a deed of gift.

SHYLOCK.
I pray you give me leave to go from hence;
I am not well; send the deed after me
And I will sign it.

DUKE.
Get thee gone, but do it.

GRATIANO.
In christ’ning shalt thou have two god-fathers.
Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.

 [_Exit Shylock._]

DUKE.
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.

PORTIA.
I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon,
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is meet I presently set forth.

DUKE.
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.

 [_Exeunt Duke and his train._]

BASSANIO.
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof,
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

ANTONIO.
And stand indebted, over and above
In love and service to you evermore.

PORTIA.
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account myself well paid,
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
I pray you know me when we meet again,
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

BASSANIO.
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you,
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

PORTIA.
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
[_To Antonio_.] Give me your gloves, I’ll wear them for your sake.
[_To Bassanio_.] And, for your love, I’ll take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand; I’ll take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.

BASSANIO.
This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle,
I will not shame myself to give you this.

PORTIA.
I will have nothing else but only this,
And now methinks I have a mind to it.

BASSANIO.
There’s more depends on this than on the value.
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation,
Only for this I pray you pardon me.

PORTIA.
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answer’d.

BASSANIO.
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it.

PORTIA.
That ’scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
And if your wife be not a mad-woman,
And know how well I have deserv’d this ring,
She would not hold out enemy for ever
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you!

 [_Exeunt Portia and Nerissa._]

ANTONIO.
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
Let his deservings and my love withal
Be valued ’gainst your wife’s commandment.

BASSANIO.
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him;
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou canst
Unto Antonio’s house. Away, make haste.

 [_Exit Gratiano._]

Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont. Come, Antonio.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A street.

 Enter Portia and Nerissa.

PORTIA.
Inquire the Jew’s house out, give him this deed,
And let him sign it, we’ll away tonight,
And be a day before our husbands home.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

 Enter Gratiano.

GRATIANO.
Fair sir, you are well o’erta’en.
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
Your company at dinner.

PORTIA.
That cannot be;
His ring I do accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylock’s house.

GRATIANO.
That will I do.

NERISSA.
Sir, I would speak with you.
[_Aside to Portia_.]
I’ll see if I can get my husband’s ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.

PORTIA.
[_To Nerissa_.] Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we’ll outface them, and outswear them too.
Away! make haste! Thou know’st where I will tarry.

NERISSA.
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Belmont. The avenue to Portia’s house.


 Enter Lorenzo and Jessica.

LORENZO.
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
And they did make no noise, in such a night,
Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls,
And sigh’d his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.

JESSICA.
In such a night
Did Thisbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew,
And saw the lion’s shadow ere himself,
And ran dismay’d away.

LORENZO.
In such a night
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
To come again to Carthage.

JESSICA.
In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Æson.

LORENZO.
In such a night
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
As far as Belmont.

JESSICA.
In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne’er a true one.

LORENZO.
In such a night
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

JESSICA.
I would out-night you did no body come;
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

 Enter Stephano.

LORENZO.
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

STEPHANO.
A friend.

LORENZO.
A friend! What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?

STEPHANO.
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about
By holy crosses where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

LORENZO.
Who comes with her?

STEPHANO.
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
I pray you is my master yet return’d?

LORENZO.
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
And ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

 Enter Launcelet.

LAUNCELET. Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola!

LORENZO.
Who calls?

LAUNCELET.
Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo! Sola, sola!

LORENZO.
Leave holloaing, man. Here!

LAUNCELET.
Sola! Where, where?

LORENZO.
Here!

LAUNCELET.
Tell him there’s a post come from my master with his horn full of good
news. My master will be here ere morning.

 [_Exit._]

LORENZO.
Sweet soul, let’s in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter; why should we go in?
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.

 [_Exit Stephano._]

How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.
There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

 Enter Musicians.

Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn.
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress’ ear,
And draw her home with music.

 [_Music._]

JESSICA.
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.

LORENZO.
The reason is, your spirits are attentive.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turn’d to a modest gaze
By the sweet power of music: therefore the poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods,
Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for the time doth change his nature.
The man that hath no music in himself,
Nor is not mov’d with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

 Enter Portia and Nerissa.

PORTIA.
That light we see is burning in my hall.
How far that little candle throws his beams!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

NERISSA.
When the moon shone we did not see the candle.

PORTIA.
So doth the greater glory dim the less.
A substitute shines brightly as a king
Until a king be by, and then his state
Empties itself, as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Music! hark!

NERISSA.
It is your music, madam, of the house.

PORTIA.
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

NERISSA.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.

PORTIA.
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
When neither is attended; and I think
The nightingale, if she should sing by day
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a musician than the wren.
How many things by season season’d are
To their right praise and true perfection!
Peace! How the moon sleeps with Endymion,
And would not be awak’d!

 [_Music ceases._]

LORENZO.
That is the voice,
Or I am much deceiv’d, of Portia.

PORTIA.
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
By the bad voice.

LORENZO.
Dear lady, welcome home.

PORTIA.
We have been praying for our husbands’ welfare,
Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
Are they return’d?

LORENZO.
Madam, they are not yet;
But there is come a messenger before
To signify their coming.

PORTIA.
Go in, Nerissa.
Give order to my servants, that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence,
Nor you, Lorenzo; Jessica, nor you.

 [_A tucket sounds._]

LORENZO.
Your husband is at hand, I hear his trumpet.
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

PORTIA.
This night methinks is but the daylight sick,
It looks a little paler. ’Tis a day
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

 Enter Bassanio, Antonio, Gratiano and their Followers.

BASSANIO.
We should hold day with the Antipodes,
If you would walk in absence of the sun.

PORTIA.
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me.
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.

BASSANIO.
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

PORTIA.
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For, as I hear, he was much bound for you.

ANTONIO.
No more than I am well acquitted of.

PORTIA.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
It must appear in other ways than words,
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

GRATIANO.
[_To Nerissa_.] By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong,
In faith, I gave it to the judge’s clerk.
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.

PORTIA.
A quarrel, ho, already! What’s the matter?

GRATIANO.
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose posy was
For all the world like cutlers’ poetry
Upon a knife, “Love me, and leave me not.”

NERISSA.
What talk you of the posy, or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave.
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge’s clerk! No, God’s my judge,
The clerk will ne’er wear hair on’s face that had it.

GRATIANO.
He will, and if he live to be a man.

NERISSA.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.

GRATIANO.
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher than thyself, the judge’s clerk,
A prating boy that begg’d it as a fee,
I could not for my heart deny it him.

PORTIA.
You were to blame,—I must be plain with you,—
To part so slightly with your wife’s first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring, and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands.
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief,
An ’twere to me I should be mad at it.

BASSANIO.
[_Aside._] Why, I were best to cut my left hand off,
And swear I lost the ring defending it.

GRATIANO.
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that begg’d it, and indeed
Deserv’d it too. And then the boy, his clerk,
That took some pains in writing, he begg’d mine,
And neither man nor master would take aught
But the two rings.

PORTIA.
What ring gave you, my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you receiv’d of me.

BASSANIO.
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it, but you see my finger
Hath not the ring upon it, it is gone.

PORTIA.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will ne’er come in your bed
Until I see the ring.

NERISSA.
Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine!

BASSANIO.
Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
When nought would be accepted but the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

PORTIA.
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
Or your own honour to contain the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleas’d to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
I’ll die for’t but some woman had the ring.

BASSANIO.
No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,
And begg’d the ring, the which I did deny him,
And suffer’d him to go displeas’d away,
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
I was enforc’d to send it after him.
I was beset with shame and courtesy.
My honour would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady;
For by these blessed candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begg’d
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

PORTIA.
Let not that doctor e’er come near my house,
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you,
I’ll not deny him anything I have,
No, not my body, nor my husband’s bed.
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus,
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honour which is yet mine own,
I’ll have that doctor for mine bedfellow.

NERISSA.
And I his clerk. Therefore be well advis’d
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

GRATIANO.
Well, do you so. Let not me take him then,
For if I do, I’ll mar the young clerk’s pen.

ANTONIO.
I am th’ unhappy subject of these quarrels.

PORTIA.
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome notwithstanding.

BASSANIO.
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
Wherein I see myself—

PORTIA.
Mark you but that!
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
In each eye one. Swear by your double self,
And there’s an oath of credit.

BASSANIO.
Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

ANTONIO.
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
Which but for him that had your husband’s ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

PORTIA.
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
And bid him keep it better than the other.

ANTONIO.
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.

BASSANIO.
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!

PORTIA.
I had it of him: pardon me, Bassanio,
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

NERISSA.
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor’s clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.

GRATIANO.
Why, this is like the mending of highways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough.
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserv’d it?

PORTIA.
Speak not so grossly. You are all amaz’d.
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now return’d. I have not yet
Enter’d my house. Antonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect: unseal this letter soon.
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbour suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.

ANTONIO.
I am dumb.

BASSANIO.
Were you the doctor, and I knew you not?

GRATIANO.
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?

NERISSA.
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.

BASSANIO.
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

ANTONIO.
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road.

PORTIA.
How now, Lorenzo!
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

NERISSA.
Ay, and I’ll give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possess’d of.

LORENZO.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.

PORTIA.
It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
And charge us there upon inter’gatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

GRATIANO.
Let it be so. The first inter’gatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is,
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
Till I were couching with the doctor’s clerk.
Well, while I live, I’ll fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring.

 [_Exeunt._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR ***




cover




THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR

by William Shakespeare




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Windsor. Before Page’s house
 Scene II. The same
 Scene III. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene IV. A room in Doctor Caius’s house

 ACT II
 Scene I. Before Page’s house
 Scene II. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene III. A field near Windsor

 ACT III
 Scene I. A field near Frogmore
 Scene II. A street in Windsor
 Scene III. A room in Ford’s house
 Scene IV. A room in Page’s house
 Scene V. A room in the Garter Inn

 ACT IV
 Scene I. The street
 Scene II. A room in Ford’s house
 Scene III. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene IV. A room in Ford’s house
 Scene V. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene VI. Another room in the Garter Inn

 ACT V
 Scene I. A room in the Garter Inn
 Scene II. Windsor Park
 Scene III. The street in Windsor
 Scene IV. Windsor Park
 Scene V. Another part of the Park




Dramatis Personæ

HOST of the Garter Inn
SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
ROBIN, page to Falstaff
BARDOLPH, follower of Falstaff
PISTOL, follower of Falstaff
NYM, follower of Falstaff

Robert SHALLOW, a country justice
Abraham SLENDER, cousin to Shallow
Peter SIMPLE, servant to Slender
FENTON, a young gentleman

George PAGE, a Gentleman dwelling at Windsor
MISTRESS PAGE, his wife
MISTRESS ANNE PAGE, her daughter, in love with Fenton
WILLIAM PAGE, a boy, son to Page

Frank FORD, a Gentleman dwelling at Windsor
MISTRESS FORD, his wife
JOHN, Servant to Ford
ROBERT, Servant to Ford

SIR HUGH EVANS, a Welsh parson
DOCTOR CAIUS, a French physician
MISTRESS QUICKLY, servant to Doctor Caius
John RUGBY, servant to Doctor Caius

SERVANTS to Page, &c.

SCENE: Windsor and the neighbourhood




ACT I

SCENE I. Windsor. Before Page’s house


Enter Justice Shallow, Slender and Sir Hugh Evans.

SHALLOW.
Sir Hugh, persuade me not. I will make a Star Chamber matter of it. If
he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow,
esquire.

SLENDER.
In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace and Coram.

SHALLOW.
Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum.

SLENDER.
Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born, Master Parson, who writes
himself “Armigero” in any bill, warrant, quittance, or
obligation—“Armigero.”

SHALLOW.
Ay, that I do, and have done any time these three hundred years.

SLENDER.
All his successors, gone before him hath done’t; and all his ancestors
that come after him may. They may give the dozen white luces in their
coat.

SHALLOW.
It is an old coat.

EVANS.
The dozen white louses do become an old coat well. It agrees well,
passant. It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies love.

SHALLOW.
The luce is the fresh fish. The salt fish is an old coat.

SLENDER.
I may quarter, coz.

SHALLOW.
You may, by marrying.

EVANS.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.

SHALLOW.
Not a whit.

EVANS.
Yes, py’r Lady. If he has a quarter of your coat, there is but three
skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures. But that is all one. If
Sir John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you, I am of the
Church, and will be glad to do my benevolence to make atonements and
compremises between you.

SHALLOW.
The Council shall hear it; it is a riot.

EVANS.
It is not meet the Council hear a riot. There is no fear of Got in a
riot. The Council, look you, shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and
not to hear a riot. Take your vizaments in that.

SHALLOW.
Ha! O’ my life, if I were young again, the sword should end it.

EVANS.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it; and there is also
another device in my prain, which peradventure prings goot discretions
with it. There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master George Page,
which is pretty virginity.

SLENDER.
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks small like a woman?

EVANS.
It is that fery person for all the ’orld, as just as you will desire,
and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and gold, and silver, is her
grandsire upon his death’s-bed—Got deliver to a joyful
resurrections!—give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years old.
It were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire
a marriage between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.

SHALLOW.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?

EVANS.
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.

SHALLOW.
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.

EVANS.
Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.

SHALLOW.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?

EVANS.
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do despise one that is
false, or as I despise one that is not true. The knight Sir John is
there, and I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the
door for Master Page.

[_Knocks._]

What, ho! Got pless your house here!

PAGE.
[_Within_.] Who’s there?

EVANS.
Here is Got’s plessing, and your friend, and Justice Shallow, and here
young Master Slender, that peradventures shall tell you another tale,
if matters grow to your likings.

Enter Page.

PAGE.
I am glad to see your worships well. I thank you for my venison, Master
Shallow.

SHALLOW.
Master Page, I am glad to see you, much good do it your good heart! I
wished your venison better; it was ill killed. How doth good Mistress
Page? And I thank you always with my heart, la, with my heart.

PAGE.
Sir, I thank you.

SHALLOW.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.

PAGE.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.

SLENDER.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say he was outrun on
Cotsall.

PAGE.
It could not be judged, sir.

SLENDER.
You’ll not confess, you’ll not confess.

SHALLOW.
That he will not. ’Tis your fault; ’tis your fault. ’Tis a good dog.

PAGE.
A cur, sir.

SHALLOW.
Sir, he’s a good dog, and a fair dog, can there be more said? He is
good, and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here?

PAGE.
Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good office between you.

EVANS.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.

SHALLOW.
He hath wronged me, Master Page.

PAGE.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.

SHALLOW.
If it be confessed, it is not redressed. Is not that so, Master Page?
He hath wronged me, indeed he hath, at a word, he hath. Believe me.
Robert Shallow, esquire, saith he is wronged.

PAGE.
Here comes Sir John.

Enter Sir John Falstaff, Bardolph, Nym and Pistol.

FALSTAFF.
Now, Master Shallow, you’ll complain of me to the King?

SHALLOW.
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and broke open my
lodge.

FALSTAFF.
But not kissed your keeper’s daughter!

SHALLOW.
Tut, a pin! This shall be answered.

FALSTAFF.
I will answer it straight: I have done all this. That is now answered.

SHALLOW.
The Council shall know this.

FALSTAFF.
’Twere better for you if it were known in counsel: you’ll be laughed
at.

EVANS.
_Pauca verba_, Sir John; goot worts.

FALSTAFF.
Good worts? Good cabbage!—Slender, I broke your head. What matter have
you against me?

SLENDER.
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you, and against your
cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol. They carried me to
the tavern and made me drunk, and afterwards picked my pocket.

BARDOLPH.
You Banbury cheese!

SLENDER.
Ay, it is no matter.

PISTOL.
How now, Mephostophilus?

SLENDER.
Ay, it is no matter.

NYM.
Slice, I say! _Pauca, pauca_, slice, that’s my humour.

SLENDER.
Where’s Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?

EVANS.
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand; there is three umpires in
this matter, as I understand: that is, Master Page, _fidelicet_ Master
Page; and there is myself, _fidelicet_ myself; and the three party is,
lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.

PAGE.
We three to hear it and end it between them.

EVANS.
Fery goot. I will make a prief of it in my notebook, and we will
afterwards ’ork upon the cause with as great discreetly as we can.

FALSTAFF.
Pistol!

PISTOL.
He hears with ears.

EVANS.
The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this, “He hears with ear”? Why,
it is affectations.

FALSTAFF.
Pistol, did you pick Master Slender’s purse?

SLENDER.
Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might never come in mine own
great chamber again else! Of seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two
Edward shovel-boards that cost me two shilling and two pence a-piece of
Yed Miller, by these gloves.

FALSTAFF.
Is this true, Pistol?

EVANS.
No, it is false, if it is a pick-purse.

PISTOL.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner!—Sir John and master mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.—
Word of denial in thy _labras_ here!
Word of denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.

SLENDER.
[_Points at Nym_.] By these gloves, then, ’twas he.

NYM.
Be avised, sir, and pass good humours. I will say “marry trap with
you”, if you run the nuthook’s humour on me. That is the very note of
it.

SLENDER.
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it. For though I cannot
remember what I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an
ass.

FALSTAFF.
What say you, Scarlet and John?

BARDOLPH.
Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman had drunk himself out of his
five sentences.

EVANS.
It is his “five senses”. Fie, what the ignorance is!

BARDOLPH.
And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered; and so conclusions
passed the careers.

SLENDER.
Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but ’tis no matter. I’ll ne’er be
drunk whilst I live again, but in honest, civil, godly company, for
this trick. If I be drunk, I’ll be drunk with those that have the fear
of God, and not with drunken knaves.

EVANS.
So Got ’udge me, that is a virtuous mind.

FALSTAFF.
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen; you hear it.

Enter Mistress Ford, Mistress Page and her daughter Anne Page with
wine.

PAGE
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in, we’ll drink within.

[_Exit Anne Page._]

SLENDER
O heaven, this is Mistress Anne Page.

PAGE.
How now, Mistress Ford?

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met. By your leave, good
mistress.

[_Kisses her._]

PAGE.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a hot venison pasty to
dinner. Come, gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.

[_Exeunt all but Slender._]

SLENDER.
I had rather than forty shillings I had my book of _Songs and Sonnets_
here.

Enter Simple.

How now, Simple, where have you been? I must wait on myself, must I?
You have not the _Book of Riddles_ about you, have you?

SIMPLE.
_Book of Riddles?_ Why, did you not lend it to Alice Shortcake upon
Allhallowmas last, a fortnight afore Michaelmas?

Enter Shallow and Sir Hugh Evans.

SHALLOW.
Come, coz; come, coz, we stay for you. A word with you, coz. Marry,
this, coz: there is, as ’twere, a tender, a kind of tender, made afar
off by Sir Hugh here. Do you understand me?

SLENDER.
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable. If it be so, I shall do that
that is reason.

SHALLOW.
Nay, but understand me.

SLENDER.
So I do, sir.

EVANS.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender. I will description the matter
to you, if you be capacity of it.

SLENDER.
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says. I pray you pardon me, he’s a
Justice of Peace in his country, simple though I stand here.

EVANS.
But that is not the question. The question is concerning your marriage.

SHALLOW.
Ay, there’s the point, sir.

EVANS.
Marry, is it; the very point of it—to Mistress Anne Page.

SLENDER.
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any reasonable demands.

EVANS.
But can you affection the ’oman? Let us command to know that of your
mouth, or of your lips; for divers philosophers hold that the lips is
parcel of the mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your good will
to the maid?

SHALLOW.
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?

SLENDER.
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that would do reason.

EVANS.
Nay, Got’s lords and his ladies! You must speak possitable, if you can
carry her your desires towards her.

SHALLOW.
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?

SLENDER.
I will do a greater thing than that, upon your request, cousin, in any
reason.

SHALLOW.
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz. What I do is to pleasure you,
coz. Can you love the maid?

SLENDER.
I will marry her, sir, at your request. But if there be no great love
in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance,
when we are married and have more occasion to know one another. I hope
upon familiarity will grow more contempt. But if you say “Marry her,” I
will marry her. That I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.

EVANS.
It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the ’ord
“dissolutely.” The ’ort is, according to our meaning, “resolutely.” His
meaning is good.

SHALLOW.
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.

SLENDER.
Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!

SHALLOW.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.

Enter Anne Page.

SHALLOW.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.—Would I were young for your sake,
Mistress Anne.

ANNE.
The dinner is on the table, my father desires your worships’ company.

SHALLOW.
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.

EVANS.
’Od’s plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.

[_Exeunt Shallow and Sir Hugh Evans._]

ANNE
Will’t please your worship to come in, sir?

SLENDER.
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very well.

ANNE.
The dinner attends you, sir.

SLENDER.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. [_To Simple_.] Go, sirrah,
for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin Shallow.

[_Exit Simple._]

A Justice of Peace sometime may be beholding to his friend for a man. I
keep but three men and a boy yet, till my mother be dead. But what
though? Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.

ANNE.
I may not go in without your worship. They will not sit till you come.

SLENDER.
I’ faith, I’ll eat nothing. I thank you as much as though I did.

ANNE.
I pray you, sir, walk in.

SLENDER.
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised my shin th’ other day
with playing at sword and dagger with a master of fence—three veneys
for a dish of stewed prunes—and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell
of hot meat since. Why do your dogs bark so? Be there bears i’ the
town?

ANNE.
I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.

SLENDER.
I love the sport well, but I shall as soon quarrel at it as any man in
England. You are afraid, if you see the bear loose, are you not?

ANNE.
Ay, indeed, sir.

SLENDER.
That’s meat and drink to me now. I have seen Sackerson loose twenty
times, and have taken him by the chain. But, I warrant you, the women
have so cried and shrieked at it that it passed. But women, indeed,
cannot abide ’em; they are very ill-favoured rough things.

Enter Page.

PAGE
Come, gentle Master Slender, come. We stay for you.

SLENDER.
I’ll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.

PAGE.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come, come.

SLENDER.
Nay, pray you lead the way.

PAGE.
Come on, sir.

SLENDER.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.

ANNE.
Not I, sir; pray you keep on.

SLENDER.
Truly, I will not go first; truly, la! I will not do you that wrong.

ANNE.
I pray you, sir.

SLENDER.
I’ll rather be unmannerly than troublesome. You do yourself wrong,
indeed, la!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same

Enter Sir Hugh Evans and Simple.

EVANS.
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius’ house which is the way. And
there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse,
or his dry nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer and his
wringer.

SIMPLE.
Well, sir.

EVANS.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter. For it is a ’oman that
altogether’s acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page; and the letter is to
desire and require her to solicit your master’s desires to Mistress
Anne Page. I pray you be gone. I will make an end of my dinner; there’s
pippins and cheese to come.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Falstaff, Host, Bardolph, Nym, Pistol and Robin.

FALSTAFF.
Mine host of the Garter!

HOST.
What says my bully rook? Speak scholarly and wisely.

FALSTAFF.
Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my followers.

HOST.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier. Let them wag; trot, trot.

FALSTAFF.
I sit at ten pounds a week.

HOST.
Thou’rt an emperor—Caesar, Keiser, and Pheazar. I will entertain
Bardolph. He shall draw, he shall tap. Said I well, bully Hector?

FALSTAFF.
Do so, good mine host.

HOST.
I have spoke, let him follow.—Let me see thee froth and lime. I am at a
word, follow.

[_Exit Host._]

FALSTAFF.
Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade. An old cloak makes a
new jerkin; a withered servingman a fresh tapster. Go, adieu.

BARDOLPH.
It is a life that I have desired. I will thrive.

PISTOL.
O base Hungarian wight, wilt thou the spigot wield?

[_Exit Bardolph._]

NYM
He was gotten in drink. Is not the humour conceited?

FALSTAFF.
I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox. His thefts were too open.
His filching was like an unskilful singer, he kept not time.

NYM.
The good humour is to steal at a minute’s rest.

PISTOL.
“Convey,” the wise it call. “Steal?” Foh! A _fico_ for the phrase!

FALSTAFF.
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.

PISTOL.
Why, then, let kibes ensue.

FALSTAFF.
There is no remedy, I must cony-catch, I must shift.

PISTOL.
Young ravens must have food.

FALSTAFF.
Which of you know Ford of this town?

PISTOL.
I ken the wight, he is of substance good.

FALSTAFF.
My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.

PISTOL.
Two yards, and more.

FALSTAFF.
No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the waist two yards about, but I
am now about no waste; I am about thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make
love to Ford’s wife. I spy entertainment in her. She discourses, she
carves, she gives the leer of invitation. I can construe the action of
her familiar style; and the hardest voice of her behaviour, to be
Englished rightly, is “I am Sir John Falstaff’s.”

PISTOL.
He hath studied her will and translated her will—out of honesty into
English.

NYM.
The anchor is deep. Will that humour pass?

FALSTAFF.
Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her husband’s purse. He
hath a legion of angels.

PISTOL.
As many devils entertain, and “To her, boy,” say I.

NYM.
The humour rises; it is good. Humour me the angels.

FALSTAFF.
I have writ me here a letter to her; and here another to Page’s wife,
who even now gave me good eyes too, examined my parts with most
judicious oeillades. Sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot,
sometimes my portly belly.

PISTOL.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.

NYM.
I thank thee for that humour.

FALSTAFF.
O, she did so course o’er my exteriors with such a greedy intention
that the appetite of her eye did seem to scorch me up like a
burning-glass. Here’s another letter to her. She bears the purse too;
she is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty. I will be cheaters to
them both, and they shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East
and West Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go, bear thou this
letter to Mistress Page;—and thou this to Mistress Ford. We will
thrive, lads, we will thrive.

PISTOL.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!

NYM.
I will run no base humour. Here, take the humour-letter. I will keep
the ’haviour of reputation.

FALSTAFF.
[_To Robin_.] Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.—
Rogues, hence, avaunt! Vanish like hailstones, go!
Trudge, plod away o’ th’ hoof, seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humour of this age:
French thrift, you rogues—myself and skirted page.

[_Exeunt Falstaff and Robin._]

PISTOL
Let vultures gripe thy guts! For gourd and fullam holds,
And high and low beguile the rich and poor.
Tester I’ll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!

NYM.
I have operations in my head which be humours of revenge.

PISTOL.
Wilt thou revenge?

NYM.
By welkin and her star!

PISTOL.
With wit or steel?

NYM.
With both the humours, I.
I will discuss the humour of this love to Ford.

PISTOL.
And I to Page shall eke unfold
How Falstaff, varlet vile,
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.

NYM.
My humour shall not cool. I will incense Ford to deal with poison, I
will possess him with yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous.
That is my true humour.

PISTOL.
Thou art the Mars of malcontents. I second thee. Troop on.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Doctor Caius’s house

Enter Mistress Quickly and Simple.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
What, John Rugby!

Enter Rugby.

I pray thee go to the casement, and see if you can see my master,
Master Doctor Caius, coming. If he do, i’ faith, and find anybody in
the house, here will be an old abusing of God’s patience and the King’s
English.

RUGBY.
I’ll go watch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Go; and we’ll have a posset for’t soon at night, in faith, at the
latter end of a sea-coal fire.

[_Exit Rugby._]

An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in house
withal; and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no breed-bate. His worst
fault is that he is given to prayer; he is something peevish that way,
but nobody but has his fault. But let that pass. Peter Simple you say
your name is?

SIMPLE.
Ay, for fault of a better.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And Master Slender’s your master?

SIMPLE.
Ay, forsooth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a glover’s paring-knife?

SIMPLE.
No, forsooth, he hath but a little wee face, with a little yellow
beard, a Cain-coloured beard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?

SIMPLE.
Ay, forsooth. But he is as tall a man of his hands as any is between
this and his head. He hath fought with a warrener.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
How say you? O, I should remember him. Does he not hold up his head, as
it were, and strut in his gait?

SIMPLE.
Yes, indeed, does he.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell Master Parson Evans
I will do what I can for your master. Anne is a good girl, and I wish—

Enter Rugby.

RUGBY
Out, alas! Here comes my master.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man, go into this
closet. He will not stay long.

[_Simple steps into the closet._]

What, John Rugby! John! What, John, I say! Go, John, go inquire for my
master. I doubt he be not well, that he comes not home.

[_Exit Rugby._]

[_Sings_.] _And down, down, adown-a, etc._

Enter Doctor Caius.

CAIUS
Vat is you sing? I do not like dese toys. Pray you, go and vetch me in
my closet _une boîtine verte_, a box, a green-a box. Do intend vat I
speak? A green-a box.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay, forsooth, I’ll fetch it you.
[_Aside_.] I am glad he went not in himself. If he had found the young
man, he would have been horn-mad.

CAIUS.
_Fe, fe, fe fe! Ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je m’en vais à la cour—la
grande affaire._

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Is it this, sir?

CAIUS.
_Oui, mette-le au mon_ pocket. _Dépêche_, quickly—Vere is dat knave
Rugby?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
What, John Rugby, John!

Enter Rugby.

RUGBY
Here, sir.

CAIUS.
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come, take-a your rapier,
and come after my heel to the court.

RUGBY.
’Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.

CAIUS.
By my trot, I tarry too long. ’Od’s me! _Qu’ay j’oublié?_ Dere is some
simples in my closet dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay me, he’ll find the young man there, and be mad!

CAIUS.
_O diable, diable!_ Vat is in my closet? Villainy! _Larron!_ [_Pulling
Simple out_.] Rugby, my rapier!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Good master, be content.

CAIUS.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
The young man is an honest man.

CAIUS.
What shall de honest man do in my closet? Dere is no honest man dat
shall come in my closet.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truth of it. He came of
an errand to me from Parson Hugh.

CAIUS.
Vell?

SIMPLE.
Ay, forsooth, to desire her to—

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Peace, I pray you.

CAIUS.
Peace-a your tongue!—Speak-a your tale.

SIMPLE.
To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to speak a good word to
Mistress Anne Page for my master in the way of marriage.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
This is all, indeed, la! But I’ll ne’er put my finger in the fire, and
need not.

CAIUS.
Sir Hugh send-a you?—Rugby, _baille_ me some paper.—Tarry you a
little-a while.

[_Writes._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
[_Aside to Simple_.] I am glad he is so quiet. If he had been throughly
moved, you should have heard him so loud and so melancholy. But
notwithstanding, man, I’ll do you your master what good I can; and the
very yea and the no is, the French doctor, my master—I may call him my
master, look you, for I keep his house, and I wash, wring, brew, bake,
scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds, and do all myself—

SIMPLE.
[_Aside to Mistress Quickly_.] ’Tis a great charge to come under one
body’s hand.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
[_Aside to Simple_.] Are you avised o’ that? You shall find it a great
charge, and to be up early and down late; but notwithstanding—to tell
you in your ear, I would have no words of it—my master himself is in
love with Mistress Anne Page; but notwithstanding that, I know Anne’s
mind. That’s neither here nor there.

CAIUS.
You jack’nape, give-a dis letter to Sir Hugh. By gar, it is a
shallenge. I will cut his troat in de park, and I will teach a scurvy
jackanape priest to meddle or make. You may be gone, it is not good you
tarry here.—By gar, I will cut all his two stones. By gar, he shall not
have a stone to throw at his dog.

[_Exit Simple._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.

CAIUS.
It is no matter-a ver dat. Do not you tell-a me dat I shall have Anne
Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack priest; and I have
appointed mine host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I will
myself have Anne Page.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We must give folks
leave to prate. What, the good-year!

CAIUS.
Rugby, come to the court with me. [_To Mistress Quickly_.] By gar, if I
have not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.—Follow my
heels, Rugby.

[_Exeunt Caius and Rugby._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
You shall have An—fool’s head of your own. No, I know Anne’s mind for
that. Never a woman in Windsor knows more of Anne’s mind than I do, nor
can do more than I do with her, I thank heaven.

FENTON.
[_Within_.] Who’s within there, ho?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Who’s there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray you.

Enter Fenton.

FENTON
How now, good woman? How dost thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
The better, that it pleases your good worship to ask.

FENTON.
What news? How does pretty Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and gentle; and one that
is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it.

FENTON.
Shall I do any good, think’st thou? Shall I not lose my suit?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Troth, sir, all is in His hands above. But notwithstanding, Master
Fenton, I’ll be sworn on a book she loves you. Have not your worship a
wart above your eye?

FENTON.
Yes, marry, have I; what of that?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Well, thereby hangs a tale. Good faith, it is such another Nan! But, I
detest, an honest maid as ever broke bread. We had an hour’s talk of
that wart. I shall never laugh but in that maid’s company. But, indeed,
she is given too much to allicholy and musing. But for you—well, go to.

FENTON.
Well, I shall see her today. Hold, there’s money for thee. Let me have
thy voice in my behalf. If thou seest her before me, commend me.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Will I? I’ faith, that we will! And I will tell your worship more of
the wart the next time we have confidence, and of other wooers.

FENTON.
Well, farewell, I am in great haste now.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Farewell to your worship.

[_Exit Fenton._]

Truly, an honest gentleman—but Anne loves him not, for I know Anne’s
mind as well as another does. Out upon ’t, what have I forgot?

[_Exit._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Before Page’s house


Enter Mistress Page reading a letter.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-time of my beauty, and
am I now a subject for them? Let me see.
[_Reads_.] _Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love use Reason
for his precisian, he admits him not for his counsellor. You are not
young, no more am I. Go to, then, there’s sympathy. You are merry, so
am I. Ha, ha, then there’s more sympathy. You love sack, and so do I.
Would you desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,
at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice, that I love thee. I
will not say, pity me—’tis not a soldier-like phrase—but I say love me.
By me,
        Thine own true knight,
        By day or night,
        Or any kind of light,
        With all his might,
        For thee to fight,
        John Falstaff._
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked world! One that is
well-nigh worn to pieces with age, to show himself a young gallant!
What an unweighed behaviour hath this Flemish drunkard picked—with the
devil’s name!—out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner
assay me? Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What should I say
to him? I was then frugal of my mirth. Heaven forgive me! Why, I’ll
exhibit a bill in the parliament for the putting down of men. How shall
I be revenged on him? For revenged I will be, as sure as his guts are
made of puddings.

Enter Mistress Ford.

MISTRESS FORD.
Mistress Page! Trust me, I was going to your house.

MISTRESS PAGE.
And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look very ill.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, I’ll ne’er believe that. I have to show to the contrary.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Faith, but you do, in my mind.

MISTRESS FORD.
Well, I do, then. Yet I say I could show you to the contrary. O,
Mistress Page, give me some counsel.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What’s the matter, woman?

MISTRESS FORD.
O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to such
honour!

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hang the trifle, woman; take the honour. What is it? Dispense with
trifles. What is it?

MISTRESS FORD.
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so, I could be
knighted.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What? Thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knights will hack, and so thou
shouldst not alter the article of thy gentry.

MISTRESS FORD.
We burn daylight. Here, read, read. Perceive how I might be knighted. I
shall think the worse of fat men as long as I have an eye to make
difference of men’s liking. And yet he would not swear; praised women’s
modesty; and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof to all
uncomeliness that I would have sworn his disposition would have gone to
the truth of his words. But they do no more adhere and keep place
together than the Hundredth Psalm to the tune of “Greensleeves.” What
tempest, I trow, threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his
belly, ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I think the
best way were to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust
have melted him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and Ford differs! To thy
great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, here’s the twin brother
of thy letter. But let thine inherit first, for I protest mine never
shall. I warrant he hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank
space for different names—sure, more, and these are of the second
edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not what he
puts into the press, when he would put us two. I had rather be a
giantess and lie under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you twenty
lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, this is the very same—the very hand, the very words. What doth he
think of us?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Nay, I know not. It makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own
honesty. I’ll entertain myself like one that I am not acquainted
withal; for, sure, unless he know some strain in me that I know not
myself, he would never have boarded me in this fury.

MISTRESS FORD.
“Boarding” call you it? I’ll be sure to keep him above deck.

MISTRESS PAGE.
So will I. If he come under my hatches, I’ll never to sea again. Let’s
be revenged on him. Let’s appoint him a meeting, give him a show of
comfort in his suit, and lead him on with a fine-baited delay, till he
hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against him that may not sully
the chariness of our honesty. O, that my husband saw this letter! It
would give eternal food to his jealousy.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, look where he comes; and my good man too. He’s as far from
jealousy as I am from giving him cause, and that, I hope, is an
unmeasurable distance.

MISTRESS FORD.
You are the happier woman.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Let’s consult together against this greasy knight. Come hither.

[_They retire._]

Enter Ford with Pistol, and Page with Nym.

FORD
Well, I hope it be not so.

PISTOL.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
Sir John affects thy wife.

FORD.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.

PISTOL.
He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford.
He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.

FORD.
Love my wife?

PISTOL.
With liver burning hot.
Prevent, or go thou like Sir Actaeon he,
With Ringwood at thy heels.
O, odious is the name!

FORD.
What name, sir?

PISTOL.
The horn, I say. Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night.
Take heed, ere summer comes, or cuckoo birds do sing.—
Away, Sir Corporal Nym.—Believe it, Page, he speaks sense.

[_Exit Pistol._]

FORD
[_Aside_.] I will be patient. I will find out this.

NYM.
[_To Page_.] And this is true, I like not the humour of lying. He hath
wronged me in some humours. I should have borne the humoured letter to
her; but I have a sword, and it shall bite upon my necessity. He loves
your wife; there’s the short and the long. My name is Corporal Nym. I
speak, and I avouch ’tis true. My name is Nym, and Falstaff loves your
wife. Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese. Adieu.

[_Exit Nym._]

PAGE
[_Aside_.] “The humour of it,” quoth ’a! Here’s a fellow frights
English out of his wits.

FORD.
[_Aside_.] I will seek out Falstaff.

PAGE.
[_Aside_.] I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.

FORD.
[_Aside_.] If I do find it—well.

PAGE.
[_Aside_.] I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest o’ the
town commended him for a true man.

FORD.
[_Aside_.] ’Twas a good sensible fellow—well.

Mistress Page and Mistress Ford come forward.

PAGE.
How now, Meg?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Whither go you, George? Hark you.

MISTRESS FORD.
How now, sweet Frank, why art thou melancholy?

FORD.
I melancholy? I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.

MISTRESS FORD.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head now.—Will you go, Mistress
Page?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Have with you. You’ll come to dinner, George?
[_Aside to Mistress Ford_.] Look who comes yonder. She shall be our
messenger to this paltry knight.

MISTRESS FORD.
[_Aside to Mistress Page_.] Trust me, I thought on her. She’ll fit it.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

MISTRESS PAGE.
You are come to see my daughter Anne?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay, forsooth. And, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Go in with us and see. We’d have an hour’s talk with you.

[_Exeunt Mistress Page, Mistress Ford and Mistress Quickly._]

PAGE
How now, Master Ford?

FORD.
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?

PAGE.
Yes, and you heard what the other told me?

FORD.
Do you think there is truth in them?

PAGE.
Hang ’em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it, but these
that accuse him in his intent towards our wives are a yoke of his
discarded men, very rogues, now they be out of service.

FORD.
Were they his men?

PAGE.
Marry, were they.

FORD.
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at the Garter?

PAGE.
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage toward my wife, I
would turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her than sharp
words, let it lie on my head.

FORD.
I do not misdoubt my wife, but I would be loath to turn them together.
A man may be too confident. I would have nothing lie on my head. I
cannot be thus satisfied.

Enter Host.

PAGE.
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes. There is either liquor
in his pate or money in his purse when he looks so merrily.—How now,
mine host?

HOST.
How now, bully rook? Thou’rt a gentleman.—Cavaliero Justice, I say!

Enter Shallow.

SHALLOW.
I follow, mine host, I follow.—Good even and twenty, good Master Page.
Master Page, will you go with us? We have sport in hand.

HOST.
Tell him, Cavaliero Justice; tell him, bully rook.

SHALLOW.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh the Welsh priest and
Caius the French doctor.

FORD.
Good mine host o’ the Garter, a word with you.

HOST.
What say’st thou, my bully rook?

[_Ford and the Host talk apart._]

SHALLOW
[_To Page_.] Will you go with us to behold it? My merry host hath had
the measuring of their weapons, and, I think, hath appointed them
contrary places; for, believe me, I hear the parson is no jester. Hark,
I will tell you what our sport shall be.

[_Shallow and Page talk apart. Ford and the Host come forward._]

HOST
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my guest cavaliero?

FORD.
None, I protest. But I’ll give you a pottle of burnt sack to give me
recourse to him, and tell him my name is Brook, only for a jest.

HOST.
My hand, bully. Thou shalt have egress and regress—said I well?—and thy
name shall be Brook. It is a merry knight. Will you go, myn-heers?

SHALLOW.
Have with you, mine host.

PAGE.
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his rapier.

SHALLOW.
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times you stand on
distance—your passes, stoccadoes, and I know not what. ’Tis the heart,
Master Page; ’tis here, ’tis here. I have seen the time, with my long
sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.

HOST.
Here, boys, here, here! Shall we wag?

PAGE.
Have with you. I had rather hear them scold than fight.

[_Exeunt Host, Shallow and Page._]

FORD
Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on his wife’s
frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion so easily. She was in his
company at Page’s house, and what they made there I know not. Well, I
will look further into ’t, and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff. If
I find her honest, I lose not my labour. If she be otherwise, ’tis
labour well bestowed.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Falstaff and Pistol.

FALSTAFF.
I will not lend thee a penny.

PISTOL.
Why then, the world’s mine oyster,
Which I with sword will open.

FALSTAFF.
Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should lay my countenance to
pawn; I have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for you
and your coach-fellow Nym, or else you had looked through the grate
like a gemini of baboons. I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen
my friends you were good soldiers and tall fellows. And when Mistress
Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took ’t upon mine honour thou
hadst it not.

PISTOL.
Didst not thou share? Hadst thou not fifteen pence?

FALSTAFF.
Reason, you rogue, reason. Think’st thou I’ll endanger my soul gratis?
At a word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you. Go—a short
knife and a throng—to your manor of Pickt-hatch, go. You’ll not bear a
letter for me, you rogue? You stand upon your honour! Why, thou
unconfinable baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the terms of
my honour precise. Ay, ay, I myself sometimes, leaving the fear of God
on the left hand, and hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fain to
shuffle, to hedge, and to lurch; and yet you, rogue, will ensconce your
rags, your cat-a-mountain looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your
bold beating oaths, under the shelter of your honour! You will not do
it! You!

PISTOL.
I do relent. What wouldst thou more of man?

Enter Robin.

ROBIN
Sir, here’s a woman would speak with you.

FALSTAFF.
Let her approach.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Give your worship good morrow.

FALSTAFF.
Good morrow, goodwife.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Not so, an’t please your worship.

FALSTAFF.
Good maid, then.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I’ll be sworn, as my mother was, the first hour I was born.

FALSTAFF.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?

FALSTAFF.
Two thousand, fair woman; and I’ll vouchsafe thee the hearing.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
There is one Mistress Ford, sir—I pray, come a little nearer this ways.
I myself dwell with Master Doctor Caius.

FALSTAFF.
Well, on; Mistress Ford, you say—

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Your worship says very true. I pray your worship come a little nearer
this ways.

FALSTAFF.
I warrant thee, nobody hears. Mine own people, mine own people.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Are they so? God bless them, and make them His servants!

FALSTAFF.
Well, Mistress Ford, what of her?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Why, sir, she’s a good creature. Lord, Lord, your worship’s a wanton!
Well, heaven forgive you, and all of us, I pray!

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, come, Mistress Ford.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Marry, this is the short and the long of it: you have brought her into
such a canaries as ’tis wonderful. The best courtier of them all, when
the court lay at Windsor, could never have brought her to such a
canary. Yet there has been knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with
their coaches, I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after letter,
gift after gift, smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so rushling, I
warrant you, in silk and gold, and in such alligant terms, and in such
wine and sugar of the best and the fairest, that would have won any
woman’s heart; and I warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of
her. I had myself twenty angels given me this morning, but I defy all
angels in any such sort, as they say, but in the way of honesty. And, I
warrant you, they could never get her so much as sip on a cup with the
proudest of them all. And yet there has been earls—nay, which is more,
pensioners—but, I warrant you, all is one with her.

FALSTAFF.
But what says she to me? Be brief, my good she-Mercury.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Marry, she hath received your letter, for the which she thanks you a
thousand times; and she gives you to notify that her husband will be
absence from his house between ten and eleven.

FALSTAFF.
Ten and eleven?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see the picture, she says, that
you wot of. Master Ford, her husband, will be from home. Alas, the
sweet woman leads an ill life with him. He’s a very jealousy man; she
leads a very frampold life with him, good heart.

FALSTAFF.
Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her; I will not fail her.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger to your worship.
Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations to you too; and let me tell
you in your ear, she’s as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, I tell
you, that will not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in
Windsor, whoe’er be the other; and she bade me tell your worship that
her husband is seldom from home, but she hopes there will come a time.
I never knew a woman so dote upon a man. Surely I think you have
charms, la! Yes, in truth.

FALSTAFF.
Not I, I assure thee. Setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I
have no other charms.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Blessing on your heart for ’t!

FALSTAFF.
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford’s wife and Page’s wife
acquainted each other how they love me?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
That were a jest indeed! They have not so little grace, I hope. That
were a trick indeed! But Mistress Page would desire you to send her
your little page, of all loves. Her husband has a marvellous infection
to the little page; and, truly, Master Page is an honest man. Never a
wife in Windsor leads a better life than she does. Do what she will,
say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she list, rise
when she list, all is as she will, and truly she deserves it, for if
there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one. You must send her your
page, no remedy.

FALSTAFF.
Why, I will.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Nay, but do so then, and, look you, he may come and go between you
both; and in any case have a nay-word, that you may know one another’s
mind, and the boy never need to understand anything; for ’tis not good
that children should know any wickedness. Old folks, you know, have
discretion, as they say, and know the world.

FALSTAFF.
Fare thee well, commend me to them both. There’s my purse; I am yet thy
debtor. Boy, go along with this woman.—This news distracts me.

[_Exeunt Mistress Quickly and Robin._]

PISTOL.
This punk is one of Cupid’s carriers;
Clap on more sails, pursue; up with your fights;
Give fire! She is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!

[_Exit Pistol._]

FALSTAFF.
Sayst thou so, old Jack? Go thy ways, I’ll make more of thy old body
than I have done. Will they yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the
expense of so much money, be now a gainer? Good body, I thank thee. Let
them say ’tis grossly done; so it be fairly done, no matter.

Enter Bardolph with a cup of sack.

BARDOLPH
Sir John, there’s one Master Brook below would fain speak with you and
be acquainted with you, and hath sent your worship a morning’s draught
of sack.

FALSTAFF.
Brook is his name?

BARDOLPH.
Ay, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Call him in.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

Such Brooks are welcome to me, that o’erflow such liquor. Ah, ha,
Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed you? Go to, _via!_

Enter Bardolph with Ford disguised as Brook.

FORD
God bless you, sir.

FALSTAFF.
And you, sir. Would you speak with me?

FORD.
I make bold to press with so little preparation upon you.

FALSTAFF.
You’re welcome. What’s your will?—Give us leave, drawer.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

FORD
Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much. My name is Brook.

FALSTAFF.
Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.

FORD.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours; not to charge you, for I must let you
understand I think myself in better plight for a lender than you are,
the which hath something emboldened me to this unseasoned intrusion;
for they say, if money go before, all ways do lie open.

FALSTAFF.
Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.

FORD.
Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me. If you will help to
bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing me of the carriage.

FALSTAFF.
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.

FORD.
I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.

FALSTAFF.
Speak, good Master Brook. I shall be glad to be your servant.

FORD.
Sir, I hear you are a scholar—I will be brief with you—and you have
been a man long known to me, though I had never so good means as desire
to make myself acquainted with you. I shall discover a thing to you,
wherein I must very much lay open mine own imperfection. But, good Sir
John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded,
turn another into the register of your own, that I may pass with a
reproof the easier, sith you yourself know how easy it is to be such an
offender.

FALSTAFF.
Very well, sir, proceed.

FORD.
There is a gentlewoman in this town, her husband’s name is Ford.

FALSTAFF.
Well, sir.

FORD.
I have long loved her, and, I protest to you, bestowed much on her,
followed her with a doting observance, engrossed opportunities to meet
her, fee’d every slight occasion that could but niggardly give me sight
of her, not only bought many presents to give her, but have given
largely to many to know what she would have given. Briefly, I have
pursued her as love hath pursued me, which hath been on the wing of all
occasions. But whatsoever I have merited, either in my mind or in my
means, meed, I am sure, I have received none, unless experience be a
jewel. That I have purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath taught
me to say this:
Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues,
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.

FALSTAFF.
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?

FORD.
Never.

FALSTAFF.
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?

FORD.
Never.

FALSTAFF.
Of what quality was your love, then?

FORD.
Like a fair house built on another man’s ground, so that I have lost my
edifice by mistaking the place where I erected it.

FALSTAFF.
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?

FORD.
When I have told you that, I have told you all. Some say that though
she appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlargeth her mirth so
far that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now, Sir John, here
is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding,
admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in your place and
person, generally allowed for your many warlike, courtlike, and learned
preparations.

FALSTAFF.
O, sir!

FORD.
Believe it, for you know it. There is money. Spend it, spend it; spend
more; spend all I have; only give me so much of your time in exchange
of it as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Ford’s wife.
Use your art of wooing, win her to consent to you. If any man may, you
may as soon as any.

FALSTAFF.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection that I should
win what you would enjoy? Methinks you prescribe to yourself very
preposterously.

FORD.
O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on the excellency of her
honour that the folly of my soul dares not present itself; she is too
bright to be looked against. Now, could I come to her with any
detection in my hand, my desires had instance and argument to commend
themselves. I could drive her then from the ward of her purity, her
reputation, her marriage vow, and a thousand other her defences, which
now are too too strongly embattled against me. What say you to’t, Sir
John?

FALSTAFF.
Master Brook, I will first make bold with your money; next, give me
your hand; and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy
Ford’s wife.

FORD.
O good sir!

FALSTAFF.
I say you shall.

FORD.
Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none.

FALSTAFF.
Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall want none. I shall be
with her, I may tell you, by her own appointment; even as you came in
to me, her assistant or go-between parted from me. I say I shall be
with her between ten and eleven, for at that time the jealous rascally
knave her husband will be forth. Come you to me at night. You shall
know how I speed.

FORD.
I am blessed in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him not. Yet I wrong him to call
him poor. They say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money, for
the which his wife seems to me well-favoured. I will use her as the key
of the cuckoldly rogue’s coffer, and there’s my harvest-home.

FORD.
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him if you saw him.

FALSTAFF.
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will stare him out of his
wits, I will awe him with my cudgel; it shall hang like a meteor o’er
the cuckold’s horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate
over the peasant, and thou shalt lie with his wife. Come to me soon at
night. Ford’s a knave, and I will aggravate his style. Thou, Master
Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold. Come to me soon at night.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

FORD.
What a damned epicurean rascal is this! My heart is ready to crack with
impatience. Who says this is improvident jealousy? My wife hath sent to
him, the hour is fixed, the match is made. Would any man have thought
this? See the hell of having a false woman: my bed shall be abused, my
coffers ransacked, my reputation gnawn at; and I shall not only receive
this villanous wrong, but stand under the adoption of abominable terms,
and by him that does me this wrong. Terms, names! Amaimon sounds well;
Lucifer, well; Barbason, well; yet they are devils’ additions, the
names of fiends. But cuckold? Wittol? Cuckold? The devil himself hath
not such a name. Page is an ass, a secure ass; he will trust his wife,
he will not be jealous. I will rather trust a Fleming with my butter,
Parson Hugh the Welshman with my cheese, an Irishman with my aqua-vitae
bottle, or a thief to walk my ambling gelding, than my wife with
herself. Then she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises; and what
they think in their hearts they may effect, they will break their
hearts but they will effect. God be praised for my jealousy! Eleven
o’clock the hour. I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on
Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it. Better three hours too
soon than a minute too late. Fie, fie, fie! Cuckold, cuckold, cuckold!

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A field near Windsor

Enter Doctor Caius and Rugby.

CAIUS.
Jack Rugby!

RUGBY.
Sir?

CAIUS.
Vat is de clock, Jack?

RUGBY.
’Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised to meet.

CAIUS.
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come. He has pray his Pible
well dat he is no come. By gar, Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he
be come.

RUGBY.
He is wise, sir; he knew your worship would kill him if he came.

CAIUS.
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him. Take your rapier,
Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.

RUGBY.
Alas, sir, I cannot fence.

CAIUS.
Villainy, take your rapier.

RUGBY.
Forbear; here’s company.

Enter Page, Shallow, Slender and Host.

HOST
God bless thee, bully doctor!

SHALLOW.
God save you, Master Doctor Caius!

PAGE.
Now, good Master Doctor!

SLENDER.
Give you good morrow, sir.

CAIUS.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?

HOST.
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse; to see thee
here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy
reverse, thy distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he
dead, my Francisco? Ha, bully? What says my Aesculapius, my Galen, my
heart of elder, ha? Is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?

CAIUS.
By gar, he is de coward Jack-priest of de vorld. He is not show his
face.

HOST.
Thou art a Castalion King Urinal Hector of Greece, my boy!

CAIUS.
I pray you, bear witness that me have stay six or seven, two, tree
hours for him, and he is no come.

SHALLOW.
He is the wiser man, Master doctor. He is a curer of souls, and you a
curer of bodies. If you should fight, you go against the hair of your
professions. Is it not true, Master Page?

PAGE.
Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great fighter, though now a
man of peace.

SHALLOW.
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old, and of the peace, if I see
a sword out, my finger itches to make one. Though we are justices and
doctors and churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in
us. We are the sons of women, Master Page.

PAGE.
’Tis true, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW.
It will be found so, Master Page.—Master Doctor Caius, I come to fetch
you home. I am sworn of the peace. You have showed yourself a wise
physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise and patient
churchman. You must go with me, Master Doctor.

HOST.
Pardon, guest justice.—A word, Monsieur Mockwater.

CAIUS.
Mockvater? Vat is dat?

HOST.
Mockwater, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.

CAIUS.
By gar, then I have as much mockvater as de Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog
priest! By gar, me vill cut his ears.

HOST.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.

CAIUS.
Clapper-de-claw? Vat is dat?

HOST.
That is, he will make thee amends.

CAIUS.
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me, for, by gar, me vill
have it.

HOST.
And I will provoke him to’t, or let him wag.

CAIUS.
Me tank you for dat.

HOST.
And, moreover, bully—but first, Master guest, and Master Page, and eke
Cavaliero Slender, go you through the town to Frogmore.

PAGE
[_Aside to Host_.] Sir Hugh is there, is he?

HOST.
[_Aside to Page_.] He is there. See what humour he is in; and I will
bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?

SHALLOW.
[_Aside to Host_.] We will do it.

PAGE, SHALLOW and SLENDER
Adieu, good Master Doctor.

[_Exeunt Page, Shallow and Slender._]

CAIUS
By gar, me vill kill de priest, for he speak for a jackanape to Anne
Page.

HOST.
Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold water on thy choler. Go
about the fields with me through Frogmore. I will bring thee where
Mistress Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting, and thou shalt woo
her. Cried game! Said I well?

CAIUS.
By gar, me tank you for dat. By gar, I love you; and I shall procure-a
you de good guest: de earl, de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my
patients.

HOST.
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page. Said I well?

CAIUS.
By gar, ’tis good; vell said.

HOST.
Let us wag, then.

CAIUS.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A field near Frogmore


Enter Sir Hugh Evans and Simple.

EVANS.
I pray you now, good Master Slender’s servingman, and friend Simple by
your name, which way have you looked for Master Caius, that calls
himself doctor of physic?

SIMPLE.
Marry, sir, the Petty-ward, the Park-ward, every way; old Windsor way,
and every way but the town way.

EVANS.
I most fehemently desire you, you will also look that way.

SIMPLE.
I will, Sir.

[_Exit Simple._]

EVANS
Pless my soul, how full of cholers I am, and trempling of mind! I shall
be glad if he have deceived me. How melancholies I am! I will knog his
urinals about his knave’s costard when I have good opportunities for
the ’ork. Pless my soul!

[_Sings._]

_To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sings madrigals.
There will we make our peds of roses
And a thousand fragrant posies.
To shallow_—

Mercy on me, I have a great dispositions to cry.

[_Sings._]

_Melodious birds sing madrigals—
Whenas I sat in Pabylon—
And a thousand vagram posies.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals._

Enter Simple.

SIMPLE
Yonder he is, coming this way, Sir Hugh.

EVANS.
He’s welcome.

[_Sings._] _To shallow rivers, to whose falls—_
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?

SIMPLE.
No weapons, sir. There comes my master, Master Shallow, and another
gentleman, from Frogmore, over the stile, this way.

EVANS.
Pray you, give me my gown—or else keep it in your arms.

Enter Page, Shallow and Slender.

SHALLOW
How now, Master Parson? Good morrow, good Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester
from the dice, and a good student from his book, and it is wonderful.

SLENDER.
[_Aside_.] Ah, sweet Anne Page!

PAGE.
God save you, good Sir Hugh!

EVANS.
God pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!

SHALLOW.
What, the sword and the word? Do you study them both, Master Parson?

PAGE.
And youthful still—in your doublet and hose, this raw rheumatic day?

EVANS.
There is reasons and causes for it.

PAGE.
We are come to you to do a good office, Master Parson.

EVANS.
Fery well; what is it?

PAGE.
Yonder is a most reverend gentleman who, belike having received wrong
by some person, is at most odds with his own gravity and patience that
ever you saw.

SHALLOW.
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never heard a man of his
place, gravity, and learning, so wide of his own respect.

EVANS.
What is he?

PAGE.
I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the renowned French
physician.

EVANS.
Got’s will and His passion of my heart! I had as lief you would tell me
of a mess of porridge.

PAGE.
Why?

EVANS.
He has no more knowledge in Hibbocrates and Galen, and he is a knave
besides, a cowardly knave as you would desires to be acquainted withal.

PAGE.
I warrant you, he’s the man should fight with him.

SLENDER.
[_Aside_.] O, sweet Anne Page!

SHALLOW.
It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder. Here comes Doctor
Caius.

Enter Host, Caius and Rugby.

PAGE
Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.

SHALLOW.
So do you, good Master Doctor.

HOST.
Disarm them, and let them question. Let them keep their limbs whole and
hack our English.

CAIUS.
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear. Verefore will you not
meet-a me?

EVANS.
[_Aside to Caius_.] Pray you, use your patience. In good time.

CAIUS.
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.

EVANS.
[_Aside to Caius_.] Pray you, let us not be laughing stocks to other
men’s humours. I desire you in friendship, and I will one way or other
make you amends.
[_Aloud_.] By Jeshu, I will knog your urinal about your knave’s
cogscomb.

CAIUS.
_Diable!_ Jack Rugby, mine Host de Jarteer, have I not stay for him to
kill him? Have I not, at de place I did appoint?

EVANS.
As I am a Christians soul, now look you, this is the place appointed.
I’ll be judgment by mine host of the Garter.

HOST.
Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh, soul-curer and
body-curer!

CAIUS.
Ay, dat is very good; excellent.

HOST.
Peace, I say! Hear mine host of the Garter. Am I politic? Am I subtle?
Am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my doctor? No, he gives me the potions
and the motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? No, he
gives me the proverbs and the no-verbs. [_To Caius_.] Give me thy hand,
terrestrial; so. [_To Evans_.] Give me thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of
art, I have deceived you both. I have directed you to wrong places.
Your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt sack be the
issue. Come, lay their swords to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace,
follow, follow, follow.

[_Exit Host._]

SHALLOW.
Afore God, a mad host! Follow, gentlemen, follow.

SLENDER.
[_Aside_.] O, sweet Anne Page!

[_Exeunt Shallow, Slender and Page._]

CAIUS
Ha, do I perceive dat? Have you make-a de sot of us, ha, ha?

EVANS.
This is well, he has made us his vlouting-stog. I desire you that we
may be friends, and let us knog our prains together to be revenge on
this same scall, scurvy, cogging companion, the host of the Garter.

CAIUS.
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me where is Anne Page;
by gar, he deceive me too.

EVANS.
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you follow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A street in Windsor

Enter Mistress Page following Robin.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Nay, keep your way, little gallant. You were wont to be a follower, but
now you are a leader. Whether had you rather, lead mine eyes, or eye
your master’s heels?

ROBIN.
I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man than follow him like a
dwarf.

MISTRESS PAGE.
O, you are a flattering boy! Now I see you’ll be a courtier.

Enter Ford.

FORD
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?

FORD.
Ay, and as idle as she may hang together, for want of company. I think
if your husbands were dead you two would marry.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Be sure of that—two other husbands.

FORD.
Where had you this pretty weathercock?

MISTRESS PAGE.
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my husband had him of. What
do you call your knight’s name, sirrah?

ROBIN.
Sir John Falstaff.

FORD.
Sir John Falstaff!

MISTRESS PAGE.
He, he; I can never hit on’s name. There is such a league between my
good man and he! Is your wife at home indeed?

FORD.
Indeed she is.

MISTRESS PAGE.
By your leave, sir, I am sick till I see her.

[_Exeunt Mistress Page and Robin._]

FORD
Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath he any thinking? Sure, they
sleep; he hath no use of them. Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty
mile as easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve score. He pieces
out his wife’s inclination, he gives her folly motion and advantage.
And now she’s going to my wife, and Falstaff’s boy with her. A man may
hear this shower sing in the wind. And Falstaff’s boy with her! Good
plots they are laid, and our revolted wives share damnation together.
Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of
modesty from the so-seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a
secure and wilful Actaeon, and to these violent proceedings all my
neighbours shall cry aim. [_Clock strikes_.] The clock gives me my cue,
and my assurance bids me search. There I shall find Falstaff. I shall
be rather praised for this than mocked, for it is as positive as the
earth is firm that Falstaff is there. I will go.

Enter Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Sir Hugh Evans, Caius and Rugby.

SHALLOW, PAGE, etc.
Well met, Master Ford.

FORD.
Trust me, a good knot. I have good cheer at home, and I pray you all go
with me.

SHALLOW.
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.

SLENDER.
And so must I, sir; we have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne, and I
would not break with her for more money than I’ll speak of.

SHALLOW.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and my cousin Slender,
and this day we shall have our answer.

SLENDER.
I hope I have your good will, father Page.

PAGE.
You have, Master Slender, I stand wholly for you.—But my wife, Master
doctor, is for you altogether.

CAIUS.
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me! My nursh-a Quickly tell me so
mush.

HOST.
What say you to young Master Fenton? He capers, he dances, he has eyes
of youth, he writes verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April and May.
He will carry ’t, he will carry ’t. ’Tis in his buttons he will carry
’t.

PAGE.
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is of no having. He
kept company with the wild Prince and Poins. He is of too high a
region, he knows too much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes
with the finger of my substance. If he take her, let him take her
simply. The wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes not
that way.

FORD.
I beseech you, heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner. Besides
your cheer, you shall have sport: I will show you a monster. Master
Doctor, you shall go; so shall you, Master Page, and you, Sir Hugh.

SHALLOW.
Well, fare you well. We shall have the freer wooing at Master Page’s.

[_Exeunt Shallow and Slender._]

CAIUS
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.

[_Exit Rugby._]

HOST
Farewell, my hearts. I will to my honest knight Falstaff, and drink
canary with him.

[_Exit Host._]

FORD
[_Aside_.] I think I shall drink in pipe-wine first with him; I’ll make
him dance.—Will you go, gentles?

ALL.
Have with you to see this monster.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A room in Ford’s house

Enter Mistress Ford and Mistress Page.

MISTRESS FORD.
What, John! What, Robert!

MISTRESS PAGE.
Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket—

MISTRESS FORD.
I warrant.—What, Robin, I say!

Enter John and Robert with a great buck-basket.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, come, come.

MISTRESS FORD.
Here, set it down.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Give your men the charge; we must be brief.

MISTRESS FORD.
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be ready here hard by in
the brew-house; and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and, without
any pause or staggering, take this basket on your shoulders. That done,
trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters in
Datchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close by the Thames
side.

MISTRESS PAGE.
You will do it?

MISTRESS FORD.
I ha’ told them over and over, they lack no direction.—Be gone, and
come when you are called.

[_Exeunt John and Robert._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Here comes little Robin.

Enter Robin.

MISTRESS FORD.
How now, my eyas-musket, what news with you?

ROBIN.
My Master, Sir John, is come in at your back door, Mistress Ford, and
requests your company.

MISTRESS PAGE.
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?

ROBIN.
Ay, I’ll be sworn. My master knows not of your being here, and hath
threatened to put me into everlasting liberty if I tell you of it; for
he swears he’ll turn me away.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Thou’rt a good boy, this secrecy of thine shall be a tailor to thee,
and shall make thee a new doublet and hose. I’ll go hide me.

MISTRESS FORD.
Do so.—Go tell thy master I am alone.

[_Exit Robin._]

Mistress Page, remember you your cue.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I warrant thee. If I do not act it, hiss me.

[_Exit Mistress Page._]

MISTRESS FORD.
Go to, then. We’ll use this unwholesome humidity, this gross watery
pumpion; we’ll teach him to know turtles from jays.

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
“Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel?” Why, now let me die, for I
have lived long enough. This is the period of my ambition. O this
blessed hour!

MISTRESS FORD.
O, sweet Sir John!

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate, Mistress Ford. Now shall I
sin in my wish: I would thy husband were dead. I’ll speak it before the
best lord: I would make thee my lady.

MISTRESS FORD.
I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful lady.

FALSTAFF.
Let the court of France show me such another. I see how thine eye would
emulate the diamond. Thou hast the right arched beauty of the brow that
becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian
admittance.

MISTRESS FORD.
A plain kerchief, Sir John. My brows become nothing else, nor that well
neither.

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so. Thou wouldst make an
absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of thy foot would give an
excellent motion to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale. I see what
thou wert, if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature thy friend. Come, thou
canst not hide it.

MISTRESS FORD.
Believe me, there’s no such thing in me.

FALSTAFF.
What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee there’s something
extraordinary in thee. Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and
that, like a many of these lisping hawthorn buds that come like women
in men’s apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury in simple-time. I cannot.
But I love thee, none but thee; and thou deservest it.

MISTRESS FORD.
Do not betray me, sir; I fear you love Mistress Page.

FALSTAFF.
Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the Counter gate, which is
as hateful to me as the reek of a lime-kiln.

MISTRESS FORD.
Well, heaven knows how I love you, and you shall one day find it.

FALSTAFF.
Keep in that mind, I’ll deserve it.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could not be in that mind.

Enter Robin.

ROBIN.
Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford, here’s Mistress Page at the door,
sweating and blowing and looking wildly, and would needs speak with you
presently.

FALSTAFF.
She shall not see me; I will ensconce me behind the arras.

MISTRESS FORD.
Pray you, do so; she’s a very tattling woman.

[_Falstaff hides himself behind the arras._]

Enter Mistress Page.

What’s the matter? How now?

MISTRESS PAGE.
O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You’re shamed, you’re overthrown,
you’re undone for ever!

MISTRESS FORD.
What’s the matter, good Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE.
O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an honest man to your husband, to
give him such cause of suspicion!

MISTRESS FORD.
What cause of suspicion?

MISTRESS PAGE.
What cause of suspicion? Out upon you! How am I mistook in you!

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, alas, what’s the matter?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Your husband’s coming hither, woman, with all the officers in Windsor,
to search for a gentleman that he says is here now in the house, by
your consent, to take an ill advantage of his absence. You are undone.

MISTRESS FORD.
’Tis not so, I hope.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here! But ’tis most
certain your husband’s coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to
search for such a one. I come before to tell you. If you know yourself
clear, why, I am glad of it; but if you have a friend here, convey,
convey him out. Be not amazed, call all your senses to you; defend your
reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.

MISTRESS FORD.
What shall I do? There is a gentleman, my dear friend; and I fear not
mine own shame as much as his peril. I had rather than a thousand pound
he were out of the house.

MISTRESS PAGE.
For shame! Never stand “you had rather” and “you had rather”. Your
husband’s here at hand. Bethink you of some conveyance. In the house
you cannot hide him. O, how have you deceived me! Look, here is a
basket. If he be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and
throw foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking. Or—it is
whiting-time—send him by your two men to Datchet Mead.

MISTRESS FORD.
He’s too big to go in there. What shall I do?

FALSTAFF.
[_Comes out of hiding_.] Let me see ’t, let me see ’t! O, let me see
’t! I’ll in, I’ll in. Follow your friend’s counsel. I’ll in.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What, Sir John Falstaff? Are these your letters, knight?

FALSTAFF.
I love thee, and none but thee. Help me away. Let me creep in here.
I’ll never—

[_He goes into the basket; they cover him with dirty clothes._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Help to cover your master, boy.—Call your men, Mistress Ford.—You
dissembling knight!

[_Exit Robin._]

MISTRESS FORD.
What, John! Robert! John!

Enter John and Robert.

Go, take up these clothes here, quickly. Where’s the cowl-staff? Look
how you drumble! Carry them to the laundress in Datchet Mead; quickly,
come.

Enter Ford, Page, Caius and Sir Hugh Evans.

FORD.
Pray you come near. If I suspect without cause, why then make sport at
me, then let me be your jest; I deserve it.—How now? Whither bear you
this?

JOHN and ROBERT.
To the laundress, forsooth.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You were best meddle
with buck-washing!

FORD.
Buck? I would I could wash myself of the buck! Buck, buck, buck! Ay,
buck! I warrant you, buck, and of the season too, it shall appear.

[_Exeunt John and Robert with the basket._]

Gentlemen, I have dreamed tonight; I’ll tell you my dream. Here, here,
here be my keys. Ascend my chambers, search, seek, find out. I’ll
warrant we’ll unkennel the fox. Let me stop this way first. [_Locks the
door_.] So, now uncape.

PAGE.
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.

FORD.
True, Master Page.—Up, gentlemen, you shall see sport anon. Follow me,
gentlemen.

[_Exit Ford._]

EVANS
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.

CAIUS.
By gar, ’tis no the fashion of France; it is not jealous in France.

PAGE.
Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his search.

[_Exeunt Page, Evans and Caius._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Is there not a double excellency in this?

MISTRESS FORD.
I know not which pleases me better, that my husband is deceived, or Sir
John.

MISTRESS PAGE.
What a taking was he in when your husband asked who was in the basket!

MISTRESS FORD.
I am half afraid he will have need of washing, so throwing him into the
water will do him a benefit.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the same strain were in the
same distress.

MISTRESS FORD.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of Falstaff’s being
here, for I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have more tricks with
Falstaff. His dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine.

MISTRESS FORD.
Shall we send that foolish carrion Mistress Quickly to him, and excuse
his throwing into the water, and give him another hope, to betray him
to another punishment?

MISTRESS PAGE.
We will do it. Let him be sent for tomorrow eight o’clock to have
amends.

Enter Ford, Page, Caius and Sir Hugh Evans.

FORD
I cannot find him. Maybe the knave bragged of that he could not
compass.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_Aside to Mistress Ford_.] Heard you that?

MISTRESS FORD.
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?

FORD.
Ay, I do so.

MISTRESS FORD.
Heaven make you better than your thoughts!

FORD.
Amen!

MISTRESS PAGE.
You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.

FORD.
Ay, ay; I must bear it.

EVANS.
If there be anypody in the house, and in the chambers, and in the
coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive my sins at the day of
judgment!

CAIUS.
Be gar, nor I too; there is nobodies.

PAGE.
Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not ashamed? What spirit, what devil
suggests this imagination? I would not ha’ your distemper in this kind
for the wealth of Windsor Castle.

FORD.
’Tis my fault, Master Page. I suffer for it.

EVANS.
You suffer for a pad conscience. Your wife is as honest a ’omans as I
will desires among five thousand, and five hundred too.

CAIUS.
By gar, I see ’tis an honest woman.

FORD.
Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come, walk in the park. I pray you
pardon me; I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this.
Come, wife, come, Mistress Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray heartily,
pardon me.

PAGE.
Let’s go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we’ll mock him. I do invite you
tomorrow morning to my house to breakfast; after, we’ll a-birding
together; I have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be so?

FORD.
Anything.

EVANS.
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.

CAIUS.
If there be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.

FORD.
Pray you go, Master Page.

[_Exeunt all but Evans and Caius._]

EVANS.
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy knave, mine host.

CAIUS.
Dat is good, by gar, with all my heart.

EVANS.
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Page’s house

Enter Fenton and Anne Page.

FENTON.
I see I cannot get thy father’s love;
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.

ANNE.
Alas, how then?

FENTON.
Why, thou must be thyself.
He doth object I am too great of birth,
And that my state being galled with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me:
My riots past, my wild societies—
And tells me ’tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.

ANNE.
Maybe he tells you true.

FENTON.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father’s wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee, Anne,
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags.
And ’tis the very riches of thyself
That now I aim at.

ANNE.
Gentle Master Fenton,
Yet seek my father’s love, still seek it, sir.
If opportunity and humblest suit
Cannot attain it, why then—hark you hither.

[_They talk apart._]

Enter Shallow, Slender and Mistress Quickly.

SHALLOW.
Break their talk, Mistress Quickly. My kinsman shall speak for himself.

SLENDER.
I’ll make a shaft or a bolt on ’t. ’Slid, ’tis but venturing.

SHALLOW.
Be not dismayed.

SLENDER.
No, she shall not dismay me. I care not for that, but that I am afeard.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word with you.

ANNE.
I come to him.
[_Aside_.] This is my father’s choice.
O, what a world of vile ill-favoured faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.

[_They talk aside._]

SHALLOW.
[_To Slender_.] She’s coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!

SLENDER.
I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell you good jests of
him.—Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne the jest how my father stole
two geese out of a pen, good uncle.

SHALLOW.
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.

SLENDER.
Ay, that I do, as well as I love any woman in Gloucestershire.

SHALLOW.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.

SLENDER.
Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under the degree of a squire.

SHALLOW.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.

ANNE.
Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.

SHALLOW.
Marry, I thank you for it, I thank you for that good comfort.—She calls
you, coz; I’ll leave you.

ANNE.
Now, Master Slender.

SLENDER.
Now, good Mistress Anne.

ANNE.
What is your will?

SLENDER.
My will? ’Od’s heartlings, that’s a pretty jest indeed! I ne’er made my
will yet, I thank heaven. I am not such a sickly creature, I give
heaven praise.

ANNE.
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?

SLENDER.
Truly, for mine own part I would little or nothing with you. Your
father and my uncle hath made motions. If it be my luck, so; if not,
happy man be his dole. They can tell you how things go better than I
can. You may ask your father. Here he comes.

Enter Page and Mistress Page.

PAGE
Now, Master Slender.—Love him, daughter Anne.—
Why, how now? What does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.

FENTON.
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.

PAGE.
She is no match for you.

FENTON.
Sir, will you hear me?

PAGE.
No, good Master Fenton.—
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.—
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.

[_Exeunt Page, Shallow and Slender._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Speak to Mistress Page.

FENTON.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colours of my love
And not retire. Let me have your good will.

ANNE.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
That’s my master, Master Doctor.

ANNE.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i’ th’ earth,
And bowled to death with turnips.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, trouble not yourself, good Master Fenton,
I will not be your friend, nor enemy.
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then, farewell, sir. She must needs go in;
Her father will be angry.

FENTON.
Farewell, gentle mistress. Farewell, Nan.

[_Exeunt Mistress Page and Anne._]

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
This is my doing now. “Nay,” said I, “will you cast away your child on
a fool, and a physician? Look on Master Fenton.” This is my doing.

FENTON.
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once tonight
Give my sweet Nan this ring. There’s for thy pains.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Now Heaven send thee good fortune!

[_Exit Fenton._]

A kind heart he hath. A woman would run through fire and water for such
a kind heart. But yet I would my master had Mistress Anne, or I would
Master Slender had her; or, in sooth, I would Master Fenton had her. I
will do what I can for them all three, for so I have promised and I’ll
be as good as my word—but speciously for Master Fenton. Well, I must of
another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two mistresses. What a
beast am I to slack it!

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
Bardolph, I say!

Enter Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Here, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in ’t.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

Have I lived to be carried in a basket like a barrow of butcher’s
offal, and to be thrown in the Thames? Well, if I be served such
another trick, I’ll have my brains ta’en out and buttered, and give
them to a dog for a New Year’s gift. ’Sblood, the rogues slighted me
into the river with as little remorse as they would have drowned a
blind bitch’s puppies, fifteen i’ the litter; and you may know by my
size that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as
deep as hell, I should down. I had been drowned, but that the shore was
shelvy and shallow—a death that I abhor, for the water swells a man,
and what a thing should I have been when I had been swelled! I should
have been a mountain of mummy.

Enter Bardolph with sack.

BARDOLPH
Here’s Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.

FALSTAFF.
Come, let me pour in some sack to the Thames water, for my belly’s as
cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins. Call
her in.

BARDOLPH.
Come in, woman.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
By your leave, I cry you mercy. Give your worship good morrow.

FALSTAFF.
Take away these chalices. Go, brew me a pottle of sack finely.

BARDOLPH.
With eggs, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Simple of itself. I’ll no pullet sperm in my brewage.

[_Exit Bardolph._]

How now?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress Ford.

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford? I have had ford enough. I was thrown into the ford, I
have my belly full of ford.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Alas the day, good heart, that was not her fault. She does so take on
with her men; they mistook their erection.

FALSTAFF.
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman’s promise.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn your heart to see
it. Her husband goes this morning a-birding; she desires you once more
to come to her, between eight and nine. I must carry her word quickly.
She’ll make you amends, I warrant you.

FALSTAFF.
Well, I will visit her. Tell her so, and bid her think what a man is.
Let her consider his frailty, and then judge of my merit.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I will tell her.

FALSTAFF.
Do so. Between nine and ten, sayst thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Eight and nine, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Well, be gone. I will not miss her.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Peace be with you, sir.

[_Exit Mistress Quickly._]

FALSTAFF.
I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me word to stay within. I
like his money well. O, here he comes.

Enter Ford disguised.

FORD
God bless you, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Now, Master Brook, you come to know what hath passed between me and
Ford’s wife?

FORD.
That indeed, Sir John, is my business.

FALSTAFF.
Master Brook, I will not lie to you. I was at her house the hour she
appointed me.

FORD.
And how sped you, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Very ill-favouredly, Master Brook.

FORD.
How so, sir? Did she change her determination?

FALSTAFF.
No. Master Brook, but the peaking cornuto her husband, Master Brook,
dwelling in a continual ’larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of
our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, protested, and, as it
were, spoke the prologue of our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of
his companions, thither provoked and instigated by his distemper, and,
forsooth, to search his house for his wife’s love.

FORD.
What, while you were there?

FALSTAFF.
While I was there.

FORD.
And did he search for you, and could not find you?

FALSTAFF.
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes in one Mistress Page,
gives intelligence of Ford’s approach; and, in her invention and Ford’s
wife’s distraction, they conveyed me into a buck-basket.

FORD.
A buck-basket!

FALSTAFF.
By the Lord, a buck-basket! Rammed me in with foul shirts and smocks,
socks, foul stockings, greasy napkins, that, Master Brook, there was
the rankest compound of villainous smell that ever offended nostril.

FORD.
And how long lay you there?

FALSTAFF.
Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have suffered to bring this
woman to evil for your good. Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple
of Ford’s knaves, his hinds, were called forth by their mistress to
carry me in the name of foul clothes to Datchet Lane. They took me on
their shoulders, met the jealous knave their master in the door, who
asked them once or twice what they had in their basket. I quaked for
fear lest the lunatic knave would have searched it; but Fate, ordaining
he should be a cuckold, held his hand. Well, on went he for a search,
and away went I for foul clothes. But mark the sequel, Master Brook. I
suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first, an intolerable
fright to be detected with a jealous rotten bell-wether; next, to be
compassed like a good bilbo in the circumference of a peck, hilt to
point, heel to head; and then, to be stopped in, like a strong
distillation, with stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease.
Think of that, a man of my kidney, think of that—that am as subject to
heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw. It was a
miracle to ’scape suffocation. And in the height of this bath, when I
was more than half stewed in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be thrown
into the Thames and cooled, glowing hot, in that surge, like a
horseshoe! Think of that—hissing hot—think of that, Master Brook.

FORD.
In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that for my sake you have suffered all
this. My suit, then, is desperate. You’ll undertake her no more?

FALSTAFF.
Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have been into Thames,
ere I will leave her thus. Her husband is this morning gone a-birding;
I have received from her another embassy of meeting. ’Twixt eight and
nine is the hour, Master Brook.

FORD.
’Tis past eight already, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Is it? I will then address me to my appointment. Come to me at your
convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed; and the conclusion
shall be crowned with your enjoying her. Adieu. You shall have her,
Master Brook. Master Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

FORD
Hum! Ha! Is this a vision? Is this a dream? Do I sleep? Master Ford,
awake; awake, Master Ford! There’s a hole made in your best coat,
Master Ford. This ’tis to be married; this ’tis to have linen and
buck-baskets! Well, I will proclaim myself what I am. I will now take
the lecher. He is at my house. He cannot scape me. ’Tis impossible he
should. He cannot creep into a half-penny purse, nor into a pepperbox.
But, lest the devil that guides him should aid him, I will search
impossible places. Though what I am I cannot avoid, yet to be what I
would not shall not make me tame. If I have horns to make one mad, let
the proverb go with me: I’ll be horn-mad.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The street


Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Quickly and William.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Is he at Master Ford’s already, think’st thou?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Sure he is by this; or will be presently. But truly he is very
courageous mad about his throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires
you to come suddenly.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I’ll be with her by and by. I’ll but bring my young man here to school.
Look where his master comes; ’tis a playing day, I see.

Enter Sir Hugh Evans.

How now, Sir Hugh, no school today?

EVANS.
No, Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Blessing of his heart!

MISTRESS PAGE.
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at his
book. I pray you ask him some questions in his accidence.

EVANS.
Come hither, William. Hold up your head, come.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come on, sirrah. Hold up your head. Answer your master, be not afraid.

EVANS.
William, how many numbers is in nouns?

WILLIAM.
Two.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Truly, I thought there had been one number more, because they say
“’Od’s nouns.”

EVANS.
Peace your tattlings! What is “fair,” William?

WILLIAM.
_Pulcher_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Polecats? There are fairer things than polecats, sure.

EVANS.
You are a very simplicity ’oman; I pray you, peace.—What is _lapis_,
William?

WILLIAM.
A stone.

EVANS.
And what is “a stone,” William?

WILLIAM.
A pebble.

EVANS.
No, it is _lapis_. I pray you remember in your prain.

WILLIAM.
_Lapis_.

EVANS.
That is a good William. What is he, William, that does lend articles?

WILLIAM.
Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thus declined:
_singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc_.

EVANS.
_Nominativo, hig, haeg, hog_, pray you, mark: _genitivo, huius_. Well,
what is your accusative case?

WILLIAM.
_Accusativo, hinc_.

EVANS.
I pray you, have your remembrance, child. _Accusativo, hung, hang,
hog_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
“Hang-hog” is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.

EVANS.
Leave your prabbles, ’oman.—What is the focative case, William?

WILLIAM.
O—_vocativo_—O—

EVANS.
Remember, William; focative is _caret_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And that’s a good root.

EVANS.
’Oman, forbear.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Peace.

EVANS.
What is your genitive case plural, William?

WILLIAM.
Genitive case?

EVANS.
Ay.

WILLIAM.
Genitive: _horum, harum, horum_.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Vengeance of Jenny’s case, fie on her! Never name her, child, if she be
a whore.

EVANS.
For shame, ’oman.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
You do ill to teach the child such words.—He teaches him to hick and to
hack, which they’ll do fast enough of themselves; and to call “whore
’m”!—Fie upon you!

EVANS.
’Oman, art thou lunatics? Hast thou no understandings for thy cases,
and the numbers of the genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures
as I would desires.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_To Quickly_.] Prithee, hold thy peace.

EVANS.
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.

WILLIAM.
Forsooth, I have forgot.

EVANS.
It is _qui, quae, quod_. If you forget your _quis_, your _quaes_, and
your _quods_, you must be preeches. Go your ways and play, go.

MISTRESS PAGE.
He is a better scholar than I thought he was.

EVANS.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Adieu, good Sir Hugh.

[_Exit Sir Hugh Evans._]

Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in Ford’s house

Enter Falstaff and Mistress Ford.

FALSTAFF.
Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my sufferance. I see you are
obsequious in your love, and I profess requital to a hair’s breadth,
not only, Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the
accoutrement, compliment, and ceremony of it. But are you sure of your
husband now?

MISTRESS FORD.
He’s a-birding, sweet Sir John.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_Within_.] What ho, gossip Ford, what ho!

MISTRESS FORD.
Step into the chamber, Sir John.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

Enter Mistress Page.

MISTRESS PAGE.
How now, sweetheart, who’s at home besides yourself?

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, none but mine own people.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Indeed?

MISTRESS FORD.
No, certainly.
[_Aside to her_.] Speak louder.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again. He so takes on
yonder with my husband, so rails against all married mankind, so curses
all Eve’s daughters, of what complexion soever, and so buffets himself
on the forehead, crying “Peer out, peer out!” that any madness I ever
yet beheld seemed but tameness, civility, and patience, to this his
distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat knight is not here.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, does he talk of him?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Of none but him, and swears he was carried out, the last time he
searched for him, in a basket; protests to my husband he is now here;
and hath drawn him and the rest of their company from their sport, to
make another experiment of his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is
not here. Now he shall see his own foolery.

MISTRESS FORD.
How near is he, Mistress Page?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hard by, at street end. He will be here anon.

MISTRESS FORD.
I am undone! The knight is here.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, then, you are utterly shamed, and he’s but a dead man. What a
woman are you! Away with him, away with him! Better shame than murder.

MISTRESS FORD.
Which way should he go? How should I bestow him? Shall I put him into
the basket again?

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
No, I’ll come no more i’ the basket. May I not go out ere he come?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Alas, three of Master Ford’s brothers watch the door with pistols, that
none shall issue out, otherwise you might slip away ere he came. But
what make you here?

FALSTAFF.
What shall I do? I’ll creep up into the chimney.

MISTRESS FORD.
There they always use to discharge their birding-pieces.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Creep into the kiln-hole.

FALSTAFF.
Where is it?

MISTRESS FORD.
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press, coffer, chest, trunk,
well, vault, but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of such
places, and goes to them by his note. There is no hiding you in the
house.

FALSTAFF.
I’ll go out then.

MISTRESS PAGE.
If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir John—unless you go
out disguised.

MISTRESS FORD.
How might we disguise him?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Alas the day, I know not. There is no woman’s gown big enough for him;
otherwise he might put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so
escape.

FALSTAFF.
Good hearts, devise something. Any extremity rather than a mischief.

MISTRESS FORD.
My maid’s aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a gown above.

MISTRESS PAGE.
On my word, it will serve him. She’s as big as he is. And there’s her
thrummed hat, and her muffler too.—Run up, Sir John.

MISTRESS FORD.
Go, go, sweet Sir John. Mistress Page and I will look some linen for
your head.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Quick, quick! We’ll come dress you straight; put on the gown the while.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

MISTRESS FORD.
I would my husband would meet him in this shape. He cannot abide the
old woman of Brentford; he swears she’s a witch, forbade her my house,
and hath threatened to beat her.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Heaven guide him to thy husband’s cudgel and the devil guide his cudgel
afterwards!

MISTRESS FORD.
But is my husband coming?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Ay, in good sadness is he, and talks of the basket too, howsoever he
hath had intelligence.

MISTRESS FORD.
We’ll try that; for I’ll appoint my men to carry the basket again, to
meet him at the door with it as they did last time.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Nay, but he’ll be here presently. Let’s go dress him like the witch of
Brentford.

MISTRESS FORD.
I’ll first direct my men what they shall do with the basket. Go up,
I’ll bring linen for him straight.

[_Exit Mistress Ford._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Hang him, dishonest varlet! We cannot misuse him enough.
We’ll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
’Tis old but true: “Still swine eats all the draff.”

[_Exit._]

Enter Mistress Ford with John and Robert.

MISTRESS FORD.
Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders. Your master is hard
at door; if he bid you set it down, obey him. Quickly, dispatch.

[_Exit Mistress Ford._]

JOHN.
Come, come, take it up.

ROBERT.
Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.

JOHN.
I hope not, I had lief as bear so much lead.

Enter Ford, Page, Shallow, Caius and Sir Hugh Evans.

FORD
Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any way then to unfool
me again?—Set down the basket, villain! Somebody call my wife. Youth in
a basket! O you panderly rascals! There’s a knot, a gin, a pack, a
conspiracy against me. Now shall the devil be shamed.—What, wife, I
say! Come, come forth! Behold what honest clothes you send forth to
bleaching!

PAGE.
Why, this passes, Master Ford! You are not to go loose any longer; you
must be pinioned.

EVANS.
Why, this is lunatics, this is mad as a mad dog.

SHALLOW.
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.

FORD.
So say I too, sir.

Enter Mistress Ford.

Come hither, Mistress Ford—Mistress Ford, the honest woman, the modest
wife, the virtuous creature, that hath the jealous fool to her husband!
I suspect without cause, mistress, do I?

MISTRESS FORD.
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in any dishonesty.

FORD.
Well said, brazen-face, hold it out.—Come forth, sirrah.

[_Pulls clothes out of the basket._]

PAGE.
This passes.

MISTRESS FORD.
Are you not ashamed? Let the clothes alone.

FORD.
I shall find you anon.

EVANS.
’Tis unreasonable. Will you take up your wife’s clothes? Come, away.

FORD.
Empty the basket, I say.

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, man, why?

FORD.
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conveyed out of my house
yesterday in this basket. Why may not he be there again? In my house I
am sure he is. My intelligence is true, my jealousy is
reasonable.—Pluck me out all the linen.

MISTRESS FORD.
If you find a man there, he shall die a flea’s death.

PAGE.
Here’s no man.

SHALLOW.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford, this wrongs you.

EVANS.
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the imaginations of your own
heart. This is jealousies.

FORD.
Well, he’s not here I seek for.

PAGE.
No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.

FORD
Help to search my house this one time. If I find not what I seek, show
no colour for my extremity, let me for ever be your table-sport. Let
them say of me “As jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow walnut for
his wife’s leman.” Satisfy me once more, once more search with me.

[_Exeunt John and Robert with the basket._]

MISTRESS FORD.
What, ho, Mistress Page! Come you and the old woman down; my husband
will come into the chamber.

FORD.
Old woman? What old woman’s that?

MISTRESS FORD.
Why, it is my maid’s aunt of Brentford.

FORD.
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not forbid her my
house? She comes of errands, does she? We are simple men; we do not
know what’s brought to pass under the profession of fortune-telling.
She works by charms, by spells, by the figure, and such daubery as this
is, beyond our element. We know nothing.—Come down, you witch, you hag,
you! Come down, I say!

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, good sweet husband!—Good gentlemen, let him not strike the old
woman.

Enter Falstaff disguised as an old woman, led by Mistress Page.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, Mother Prat; come, give me your hand.

FORD.
I’ll prat her. [_Beats him_.] Out of my door, you witch, you rag, you
baggage, you polecat, you runnion! Out, out! I’ll conjure you, I’ll
fortune-tell you.

[_Exit Falstaff._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the poor woman.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, he will do it. ’Tis a goodly credit for you.

FORD.
Hang her, witch!

EVANS.
By yea and no, I think the ’oman is a witch indeed. I like not when a
’oman has a great peard. I spy a great peard under her muffler.

FORD.
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you follow, see but the issue of
my jealousy. If I cry out thus upon no trail, never trust me when I
open again.

PAGE.
Let’s obey his humour a little further. Come, gentlemen.

[_Exeunt Ford, Page, Caius, Evans and Shallow._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.

MISTRESS FORD.
Nay, by th’ mass, that he did not; he beat him most unpitifully,
methought.

MISTRESS PAGE.
I’ll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o’er the altar. It hath done
meritorious service.

MISTRESS FORD.
What think you? May we, with the warrant of womanhood and the witness
of a good conscience, pursue him with any further revenge?

MISTRESS PAGE.
The spirit of wantonness is sure scared out of him. If the devil have
him not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never, I think,
in the way of waste, attempt us again.

MISTRESS FORD.
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Yes, by all means, if it be but to scrape the figures out of your
husband’s brains. If they can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous
fat knight shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be the
ministers.

MISTRESS FORD.
I’ll warrant they’ll have him publicly shamed, and methinks there would
be no period to the jest should he not be publicly shamed.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Come, to the forge with it, then shape it. I would not have things
cool.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Host and Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your horses. The Duke himself
will be tomorrow at court, and they are going to meet him.

HOST.
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear not of him in the
court. Let me speak with the gentlemen. They speak English?

BARDOLPH.
Ay, sir. I’ll call them to you.

HOST.
They shall have my horses, but I’ll make them pay, I’ll sauce them.
They have had my house a week at command; I have turned away my other
guests. They must come off, I’ll sauce them. Come.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Ford’s house

Enter Page, Ford, Mistress Page, Mistress Ford and Sir Hugh Evans.

EVANS.
’Tis one of the best discretions of a ’oman as ever I did look upon.

PAGE.
And did he send you both these letters at an instant?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Within a quarter of an hour.

FORD.
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth, do what thou wilt.
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness. Now doth thy honour stand,
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith.

PAGE.
’Tis well, ’tis well, no more.
Be not as extreme in submission as in offence.
But let our plot go forward. Let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.

FORD.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.

PAGE.
How? To send him word they’ll meet him in the park at midnight? Fie,
fie, he’ll never come.

EVANS.
You say he has been thrown in the rivers, and has been grievously
peaten as an old ’oman. Methinks there should be terrors in him, that
he should not come. Methinks his flesh is punished; he shall have no
desires.

PAGE.
So think I too.

MISTRESS FORD.
Devise but how you’ll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.

MISTRESS PAGE.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
Doth all the winter time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragged horns,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld
Received and did deliver to our age,
This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth.

PAGE.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne’s oak.
But what of this?

MISTRESS FORD.
Marry, this is our device,
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us,
Disguised like Herne, with huge horns on his head.

PAGE.
Well, let it not be doubted but he’ll come,
And in this shape; when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?

MISTRESS PAGE.
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we’ll dress
Like urchins, oafs and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads
And rattles in their hands. Upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song; upon their sight
We two in great amazedness will fly.
Then let them all encircle him about,
And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane.

MISTRESS FORD.
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.

MISTRESS PAGE.
The truth being known,
We’ll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.

FORD.
The children must
Be practised well to this, or they’ll ne’er do ’t.

EVANS.
I will teach the children their behaviours, and I will be like a
jackanapes also, to burn the knight with my taber.

FORD.
That will be excellent. I’ll go buy them vizards.

MISTRESS PAGE.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.

PAGE.
That silk will I go buy.
[_Aside_.] And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away,
And marry her at Eton.—Go, send to Falstaff straight.

FORD.
Nay, I’ll to him again in name of Brook.
He’ll tell me all his purpose. Sure, he’ll come.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Fear not you that. Go, get us properties
And tricking for our fairies.

EVANS.
Let us about it. It is admirable pleasures and fery honest knaveries.

[_Exeunt Page, Ford and Evans._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Go, Mistress Ford.
Send quickly to Sir John to know his mind.

[_Exit Mistress Ford._]

I’ll to the Doctor. He hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot,
And he my husband best of all affects.
The Doctor is well moneyed, and his friends
Potent at court. He, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn

Enter Host and Simple.

HOST.
What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thick-skin? Speak, breathe,
discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.

SIMPLE.
Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff from Master Slender.

HOST.
There’s his chamber, his house, his castle, his standing-bed and
truckle-bed. ’Tis painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh
and new. Go, knock and call. He’ll speak like an Anthropophaginian unto
thee. Knock, I say.

SIMPLE.
There’s an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into his chamber. I’ll be so
bold as stay, sir, till she come down. I come to speak with her,
indeed.

HOST.
Ha? A fat woman? The knight may be robbed. I’ll call.—Bully knight!
Bully Sir John! Speak from thy lungs military. Art thou there? It is
thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.

FALSTAFF.
[_Above_.] How now, mine host?

HOST.
Here’s a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of thy fat woman. Let
her descend, bully, let her descend. My chambers are honourable. Fie!
Privacy? Fie!

Enter Falstaff.

FALSTAFF.
There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now with me, but she’s
gone.

SIMPLE.
Pray you, sir, was’t not the wise woman of Brentford?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, marry was it, mussel-shell. What would you with her?

SIMPLE.
My master, sir, my Master Slender, sent to her, seeing her go through
the streets, to know, sir, whether one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a
chain, had the chain or no.

FALSTAFF.
I spake with the old woman about it.

SIMPLE.
And what says she, I pray, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Marry, she says that the very same man that beguiled Master Slender of
his chain cozened him of it.

SIMPLE.
I would I could have spoken with the woman herself. I had other things
to have spoken with her too, from him.

FALSTAFF.
What are they? Let us know.

HOST.
Ay, come. Quick.

SIMPLE.
I may not conceal them, sir.

FALSTAFF.
Conceal them, or thou diest.

SIMPLE.
Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page, to know if it
were my master’s fortune to have her or no.

FALSTAFF.
’Tis, ’tis his fortune.

SIMPLE.
What sir?

FALSTAFF.
To have her, or no. Go, say the woman told me so.

SIMPLE.
May I be bold to say so, sir?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, sir; like who more bold?

SIMPLE.
I thank your worship; I shall make my master glad with these tidings.

[_Exit Simple._]

HOST
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was there a wise woman
with thee?

FALSTAFF.
Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath taught me more wit than
ever I learned before in my life; and I paid nothing for it neither,
but was paid for my learning.

Enter Bardolph.

BARDOLPH
Out, alas, sir, cozenage, mere cozenage!

HOST.
Where be my horses? Speak well of them, varletto.

BARDOLPH.
Run away, with the cozeners. For so soon as I came beyond Eton, they
threw me off from behind one of them, in a slough of mire, and set
spurs and away, like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.

HOST.
They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain, do not say they be fled.
Germans are honest men.

Enter Sir Hugh Evans.

EVANS
Where is mine host?

HOST.
What is the matter, sir?

EVANS.
Have a care of your entertainments. There is a friend of mine come to
town tells me there is three cozen-Germans that has cozened all the
hosts of Readings, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and money. I
tell you for good will, look you. You are wise, and full of gibes and
vlouting-stocks, and ’tis not convenient you should be cozened. Fare
you well.

[_Exit Evans._]

Enter Doctor Caius.

CAIUS.
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?

HOST.
Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.

CAIUS.
I cannot tell vat is dat, but it is tell-a me dat you make grand
preparation for a Duke de Jamany. By my trot, dere is no duke that the
court is know to come. I tell you for good will. Adieu.

[_Exit Doctor Caius._]

HOST
Hue and cry, villain, go!—Assist me, knight, I am undone.—Fly, run, hue
and cry, villain, I am undone!

[_Exeunt Host and Bardolph._]

FALSTAFF.
I would all the world might be cozened, for I have been cozened and
beaten too. If it should come to the ear of the court how I have been
transformed, and how my transformation hath been washed and cudgelled,
they would melt me out of my fat drop by drop, and liquor fishermen’s
boots with me. I warrant they would whip me with their fine wits till I
were as crestfallen as a dried pear. I never prospered since I forswore
myself at primero. Well, if my wind were but long enough, I would
repent.

Enter Mistress Quickly.

Now, whence come you?

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
From the two parties, forsooth.

FALSTAFF.
The devil take one party and his dam the other, and so they shall be
both bestowed. I have suffered more for their sakes, more than the
villainous inconstancy of man’s disposition is able to bear.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant, speciously one of them.
Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you cannot
see a white spot about her.

FALSTAFF.
What tellst thou me of black and blue? I was beaten myself into all the
colours of the rainbow, and was like to be apprehended for the witch of
Brentford. But that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting
the action of an old woman, delivered me, the knave constable had set
me i’ the stocks, i’ the common stocks, for a witch.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber, you shall hear how things
go, and, I warrant, to your content. Here is a letter will say
somewhat. Good hearts, what ado here is to bring you together! Sure,
one of you does not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed.

FALSTAFF.
Come up into my chamber.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Another room in the Garter Inn

Enter Fenton and Host.

HOST.
Master Fenton, talk not to me. My mind is heavy. I will give over all.

FENTON.
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, I’ll give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.

HOST.
I will hear you, Master Fenton, and I will, at the least, keep your
counsel.

FENTON.
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who mutually hath answered my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish. I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at,
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter
That neither singly can be manifested
Without the show of both, wherein fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene; the image of the jest
I’ll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host:
Tonight at Herne’s oak, just ’twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen—
The purpose why is here—in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry. She hath consented. Now, sir,
Her mother, even strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the dean’ry, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her. To this her mother’s plot
She, seemingly obedient, likewise hath
Made promise to the doctor. Now thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
She shall go with him. Her mother hath intended
The better to denote her to the doctor,
For they must all be masked and vizarded—
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribbons pendant flaring ’bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token
The maid hath given consent to go with him.

HOST.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?

FENTON.
Both, my good host, to go along with me.
And here it rests, that you’ll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church, ’twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.

HOST.
Well, husband your device; I’ll to the vicar.
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.

FENTON.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I’ll make a present recompense.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. A room in the Garter Inn


Enter Falstaff and Mistress Quickly.

FALSTAFF.
Prithee, no more prattling. Go. I’ll hold. This is the third time; I
hope good luck lies in odd numbers. Away, go! They say there is
divinity in odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death. Away!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
I’ll provide you a chain, and I’ll do what I can to get you a pair of
horns.

FALSTAFF.
Away, I say; time wears. Hold up your head, and mince.

[_Exit Mistress Quickly._]

Enter Ford.

How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter will be known tonight
or never. Be you in the park about midnight, at Herne’s oak, and you
shall see wonders.

FORD.
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me you had appointed?

FALSTAFF.
I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor old man, but I
came from her, Master Brook, like a poor old woman. That same knave
Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him, Master
Brook, that ever governed frenzy. I will tell you he beat me
grievously, in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man, Master
Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver’s beam, because I know also
life is a shuttle. I am in haste. Go along with me; I’ll tell you all,
Master Brook. Since I plucked geese, played truant, and whipped top, I
knew not what ’twas to be beaten till lately. Follow me, I’ll tell you
strange things of this knave Ford, on whom tonight I will be revenged,
and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow. Strange things in
hand, Master Brook! Follow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Windsor Park

Enter Page, Shallow and Slender.

PAGE.
Come, come. We’ll couch i’ the castle ditch till we see the light of
our fairies. Remember, son Slender, my daughter—

SLENDER.
Ay, forsooth. I have spoke with her, and we have a nay-word how to know
one another. I come to her in white and cry “mum”; she cries “budget”;
and by that we know one another.

SHALLOW.
That’s good too. But what needs either your “mum” or her “budget”? The
white will decipher her well enough. It hath struck ten o’clock.

PAGE.
The night is dark. Light and spirits will become it well. Heaven
prosper our sport! No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know
him by his horns. Let’s away; follow me.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The street in Windsor

Enter Mistress Page, Mistress Ford and Doctor Caius.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Master Doctor, my daughter is in green. When you see your time, take
her by the hand, away with her to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly.
Go before into the park. We two must go together.

CAIUS.
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Fare you well, sir.

[_Exit Caius._]

My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
chafe at the doctor’s marrying my daughter. But ’tis no matter. Better
a little chiding than a great deal of heartbreak.

MISTRESS FORD.
Where is Nan now, and her troop of fairies, and the Welsh devil Hugh?

MISTRESS PAGE.
They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne’s oak, with obscured
lights, which, at the very instant of Falstaff’s and our meeting, they
will at once display to the night.

MISTRESS FORD.
That cannot choose but amaze him.

MISTRESS PAGE.
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked; if he be amazed, he will every
way be mocked.

MISTRESS FORD.
We’ll betray him finely.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
Those that betray them do no treachery.

MISTRESS FORD.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Windsor Park

Enter Sir Hugh Evans disguised, and children as Fairies.

EVANS.
Trib, trib, fairies. Come, and remember your parts. Be pold, I pray
you, follow me into the pit, and when I give the watch-’ords, do as I
pid you. Come, come; trib, trib.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the Park

Enter Falstaff wearing a buck’s head.

FALSTAFF.
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve, the minute draws on. Now the
hot-blooded gods assist me! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy
Europa; love set on thy horns. O powerful love, that in some respects,
makes a beast a man, in some other a man a beast! You were also,
Jupiter, a swan for the love of Leda. O omnipotent love, how near the
god drew to the complexion of a goose! A fault done first in the form
of a beast; O Jove, a beastly fault! And then another fault in the
semblance of a fowl; think on’t, Jove, a foul fault! When gods have hot
backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor stag, and
the fattest, I think, i’ the forest. Send me a cool rut-time, Jove, or
who can blame me to piss my tallow? Who comes here? My doe?

Enter Mistress Ford and Mistress Page.

MISTRESS FORD.
Sir John? Art thou there, my deer, my male deer?

FALSTAFF.
My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain potatoes, let it thunder
to the tune of “Greensleeves”, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes;
let there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.

[_He embraces her._]

MISTRESS FORD.
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.

FALSTAFF.
Divide me like a bribed buck, each a haunch. I will keep my sides to
myself, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk, and my horns I
bequeath your husbands. Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the
hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes restitution.
As I am a true spirit, welcome!

[_A noise of horns within._]

MISTRESS PAGE.
Alas, what noise?

MISTRESS FORD.
Heaven forgive our sins!

FALSTAFF.
What should this be?

MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE.
Away, away!

[_They run off._]

FALSTAFF.
I think the devil will not have me damned, lest the oil that’s in me
should set hell on fire; he would never else cross me thus.

Enter Mistress Quickly as the Queen of Fairies, Sir Hugh Evans as a
Satyr, Pistol as Hobgoblin, Anne Page and children as Fairies, carrying
tapers.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.

PISTOL.
Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys!
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap,
Where fires thou find’st unraked and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry.
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.

FALSTAFF.
They are fairies, he that speaks to them shall die.
I’ll wink and couch. No man their works must eye.

[_Lies down upon his face._]

EVANS
Where’s Bead? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Rein up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy.
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
About, about!
Search Windsor castle, elves, within and out.
Strew good luck, oafs, on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom
In state as wholesome as in state ’tis fit,
Worthy the owner and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flower.
Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest,
With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garter’s compass, in a ring.
Th’ expressure that it bears, green let it be,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
And _Honi soit qui mal y pense_ write
In em’rald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white,
Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood’s bending knee.
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Away, disperse! But till ’tis one o’clock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter let us not forget.

EVANS.
Pray you, lock hand in hand, yourselves in order set;
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle earth.

FALSTAFF.
Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest he transform me to a
piece of cheese!

PISTOL.
Vile worm, thou wast o’erlooked even in thy birth.

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end.
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

PISTOL.
A trial, come.

EVANS.
Come, will this wood take fire?

[_They put the tapers to his fingers, and he starts._]

FALSTAFF.
O, o, o!

MISTRESS QUICKLY.
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies, sing a scornful rhyme,
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.

SONG.
Fie on sinful fantasy!
Fie on lust and luxury!
Lust is but a bloody fire,
Kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire,
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
Pinch him, fairies, mutually;
Pinch him for his villainy.
Pinch him and burn him and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.

[_During the song they pinch him, and Doctor Caius comes one way and
steals away a boy in green; and Slender another way takes a boy in
white; Fenton comes in and steals away Anne Page. A noise of hunting is
heard within and all the fairies run away. Falstaff pulls off his
buck’s head, and rises up._]

Enter Page, Ford, Mistress Page and Mistress Ford.

PAGE.
Nay, do not fly. I think we have watched you now.
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?

MISTRESS PAGE.
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.—
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband?

[_She points to the horns._]

Do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?

FORD.
Now, sir, who’s a cuckold now? Master Brook, Falstaff’s a knave, a
cuckoldly knave. Here are his horns, Master Brook. And, Master Brook,
he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford’s but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and
twenty pounds of money, which must be paid to Master Brook. His horses
are arrested for it, Master Brook.

MISTRESS FORD.
Sir John, we have had ill luck, we could never meet. I will never take
you for my love again, but I will always count you my deer.

FALSTAFF.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.

FORD.
Ay, and an ox too. Both the proofs are extant.

FALSTAFF.
And these are not fairies? I was three or four times in the thought
they were not fairies; and yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden
surprise of my powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into a
received belief, in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that
they were fairies. See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent when ’tis
upon ill employment!

EVANS.
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires, and fairies will
not pinse you.

FORD.
Well said, fairy Hugh.

EVANS.
And leave you your jealousies too, I pray you.

FORD.
I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able to woo her in
good English.

FALSTAFF.
Have I laid my brain in the sun, and dried it, that it wants matter to
prevent so gross o’erreaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat
too? Shall I have a cox-comb of frieze? ’Tis time I were choked with a
piece of toasted cheese.

EVANS.
Seese is not good to give putter. Your belly is all putter.

FALSTAFF.
“Seese” and “putter”? Have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that
makes fritters of English? This is enough to be the decay of lust and
late-walking through the realm.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, Sir John, do you think, though we would have thrust virtue out of
our hearts by the head and shoulders, and have given ourselves without
scruple to hell, that ever the devil could have made you our delight?

FORD.
What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?

MISTRESS PAGE.
A puffed man?

PAGE.
Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?

FORD.
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?

PAGE.
And as poor as Job?

FORD.
And as wicked as his wife?

EVANS.
And given to fornications, and to taverns, and sack, and wine, and
metheglins, and to drinkings and swearings and starings, pribbles and
prabbles?

FALSTAFF.
Well, I am your theme. You have the start of me. I am dejected, I am
not able to answer the Welsh flannel. Ignorance itself is a plummet
o’er me. Use me as you will.

FORD.
Marry, sir, we’ll bring you to Windsor to one Master Brook, that you
have cozened of money, to whom you should have been a pander. Over and
above that you have suffered, I think to repay that money will be a
biting affliction.

PAGE.
Yet be cheerful, knight. Thou shalt eat a posset tonight at my house,
where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee.
Tell her Master Slender hath married her daughter.

MISTRESS PAGE.
[_Aside_.] Doctors doubt that. If Anne Page be my daughter, she is, by
this, Doctor Caius’ wife.

Enter Slender.

SLENDER
Whoa, ho, ho, father Page!

PAGE.
Son, how now! How now, son, have you dispatched?

SLENDER.
Dispatched? I’ll make the best in Gloucestershire know on’t. Would I
were hanged, la, else!

PAGE.
Of what, son?

SLENDER.
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she’s a great
lubberly boy. If it had not been i’ the church, I would have swinged
him, or he should have swinged me. If I did not think it had been Anne
Page, would I might never stir! And ’tis a postmaster’s boy.

PAGE.
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.

SLENDER.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a boy for a girl.
If I had been married to him, for all he was in woman’s apparel, I
would not have had him.

PAGE.
Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how you should know my
daughter by her garments?

SLENDER.
I went to her in white and cried “mum”, and she cried “budget”, as Anne
and I had appointed, and yet it was not Anne, but a postmaster’s boy.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Good George, be not angry. I knew of your purpose, turned my daughter
into green, and indeed she is now with the doctor at the deanery, and
there married.

Enter Doctor Caius.

CAIUS
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened, I ha’ married _un garçon_,
a boy; _un paysan_, by gar, a boy. It is not Anne Page. By gar, I am
cozened.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why, did you take her in green?

CAIUS.
Ay, by gar, and ’tis a boy. By gar, I’ll raise all Windsor.

FORD
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?

Enter Fenton and Anne Page.

PAGE.
My heart misgives me. Here comes Master Fenton.—How now, Master Fenton!

ANNE.
Pardon, good father. Good my mother, pardon.

PAGE.
Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?

MISTRESS PAGE.
Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?

FENTON.
You do amaze her. Hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
Th’ offence is holy that she hath committed,
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours,
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.

FORD.
Stand not amazed, here is no remedy.
In love, the heavens themselves do guide the state.
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.

FALSTAFF.
I am glad, though you have ta’en a special stand to strike at me, that
your arrow hath glanced.

PAGE.
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschewed must be embraced.

FALSTAFF.
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.

MISTRESS PAGE.
Well, I will muse no further.—Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o’er by a country fire,
Sir John and all.

FORD.
Let it be so, Sir John,
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word,
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.

[_Exeunt._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF KING HENRY V ***

cover




THE LIFE OF KING HENRY V

by William Shakespeare


Contents

ACT I
Prologue.
Scene I. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.
Scene II. The same. The presence chamber.

ACT II
Chorus.
Scene I. London. A street.
Scene II. Southampton. A council-chamber.
Scene III. London. Before a tavern.
Scene IV. France. The King’s palace.

ACT III
Chorus.
Scene I. France. Before Harfleur.
Scene II. The same.
Scene III. Before the gates.
Scene IV. The French King’s palace.
Scene V. The same.
Scene VI. The English camp in Picardy.
Scene VII. The French camp, near Agincourt.

ACT IV
Chorus.
Scene I. The English camp at Agincourt.
Scene II. The French camp.
Scene III. The English camp.
Scene IV. The field of battle.
Scene V. Another part of the field.
Scene VI. Another part of the field.
Scene VII. Another part of the field.
Scene VIII. Before King Henry’s pavilion.

ACT V
Chorus.
Scene I. France. The English camp.
Scene II. France. A royal palace.
Epilogue.


Dramatis Personæ

KING HENRY V.
DUKE OF CLARENCE, brother to the King.
DUKE OF BEDFORD, brother to the King.
DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, brother to the King.
DUKE OF EXETER, uncle to the King.
DUKE OF YORK, cousin to the King.
EARL OF SALISBURY.
EARL OF HUNTINGDON.
EARL OF WESTMORLAND.
EARL OF WARWICK.
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
BISHOP OF ELY.
EARL OF CAMBRIDGE.
LORD SCROOP.
SIR THOMAS GREY.
SIR THOMAS ERPINGHAM, officer in King Henry’s army.
GOWER, officer in King Henry’s army.
FLUELLEN, officer in King Henry’s army.
MACMORRIS, officer in King Henry’s army.
JAMY, officer in King Henry’s army.
BATES, soldier in the same.
COURT, soldier in the same.
WILLIAMS, soldier in the same.
PISTOL.
NYM.
BARDOLPH.
BOY.
A Herald.

CHARLES VI, king of France.
LEWIS, the Dauphin.
DUKE OF BERRY.
DUKE OF BRITTANY.
DUKE OF BURGUNDY.
DUKE OF ORLEANS.
DUKE OF BOURBON.
The Constable of France.
RAMBURES, French Lord.
GRANDPRÉ, French Lord.
Governor of Harfleur
MONTJOY, a French herald.
Ambassadors to the King of England.

ISABEL, queen of France.
KATHARINE, daughter to Charles and Isabel.
ALICE, a lady attending on her.
HOSTESS of a tavern in Eastcheap, formerly Mistress Nell Quickly, and
now married to Pistol.

CHORUS.

Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Citizens, Messengers, and
Attendants.

SCENE: England; afterwards France.


PROLOGUE.

 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend
The brightest heaven of invention,
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,
Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire
Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,
The flat unraised spirits that hath dar’d
On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
So great an object. Can this cockpit hold
The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram
Within this wooden O the very casques
That did affright the air at Agincourt?
O pardon! since a crooked figure may
Attest in little place a million,
And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,
On your imaginary forces work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls
Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies,
Whose high upreared and abutting fronts
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder;
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide one man,
And make imaginary puissance.
Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
Printing their proud hoofs i’ th’ receiving earth.
For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,
Turning the accomplishment of many years
Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,
Admit me Chorus to this history;
Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.

 [_Exit._]



ACT I

SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.

 Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely.

CANTERBURY.
My lord, I’ll tell you, that self bill is urg’d
Which in the eleventh year of the last king’s reign
Was like, and had indeed against us passed
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.

ELY.
But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?

CANTERBURY.
It must be thought on. If it pass against us,
We lose the better half of our possession:
For all the temporal lands, which men devout
By testament have given to the Church,
Would they strip from us; being valu’d thus:
As much as would maintain, to the King’s honour,
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;
And, to relief of lazars and weak age,
Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,
A hundred almshouses right well supplied;
And to the coffers of the King beside,
A thousand pounds by th’ year. Thus runs the bill.

ELY.
This would drink deep.

CANTERBURY.
’Twould drink the cup and all.

ELY.
But what prevention?

CANTERBURY.
The King is full of grace and fair regard.

ELY.
And a true lover of the holy Church.

CANTERBURY.
The courses of his youth promis’d it not.
The breath no sooner left his father’s body
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to die too; yea, at that very moment
Consideration like an angel came
And whipped th’ offending Adam out of him,
Leaving his body as a paradise
T’ envelope and contain celestial spirits.
Never was such a sudden scholar made,
Never came reformation in a flood
With such a heady currance scouring faults,
Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulness
So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
As in this king.

ELY.
We are blessed in the change.

CANTERBURY.
Hear him but reason in divinity
And, all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a prelate;
Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,
You would say it hath been all in all his study;
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear
A fearful battle rendered you in music;
Turn him to any cause of policy,
The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,
Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,
The air, a chartered libertine, is still,
And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears
To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;
So that the art and practic part of life
Must be the mistress to this theoric:
Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
Since his addiction was to courses vain,
His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,
His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration
From open haunts and popularity.

ELY.
The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
Neighboured by fruit of baser quality;
And so the Prince obscured his contemplation
Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,
Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty.

CANTERBURY.
It must be so, for miracles are ceased,
And therefore we must needs admit the means
How things are perfected.

ELY.
But, my good lord,
How now for mitigation of this bill
Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty
Incline to it, or no?

CANTERBURY.
He seems indifferent,
Or rather swaying more upon our part
Than cherishing th’ exhibitors against us;
For I have made an offer to his Majesty,
Upon our spiritual convocation
And in regard of causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France, to give a greater sum
Than ever at one time the clergy yet
Did to his predecessors part withal.

ELY.
How did this offer seem received, my lord?

CANTERBURY.
With good acceptance of his Majesty;
Save that there was not time enough to hear,
As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,
The severals and unhidden passages
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,
And generally to the crown and seat of France,
Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.

ELY.
What was th’ impediment that broke this off?

CANTERBURY.
The French ambassador upon that instant
Craved audience; and the hour, I think, is come
To give him hearing. Is it four o’clock?

ELY.
It is.

CANTERBURY.
Then go we in, to know his embassy,
Which I could with a ready guess declare
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

ELY.
I’ll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. The presence chamber.

 Enter King Henry, Gloucester, Bedford, Clarence, Warwick, Westmorland,
 Exeter and Attendants.

KING HENRY.
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?

EXETER.
Not here in presence.

KING HENRY.
Send for him, good uncle.

WESTMORLAND.
Shall we call in th’ ambassador, my liege?

KING HENRY.
Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,
Before we hear him, of some things of weight
That task our thoughts concerning us and France.

 Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely.

CANTERBURY.
God and his angels guard your sacred throne
And make you long become it!

KING HENRY.
Sure, we thank you.
My learned lord, we pray you to proceed
And justly and religiously unfold
Why the law Salic that they have in France
Or should or should not bar us in our claim.
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,
Or nicely charge your understanding soul
With opening titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colours with the truth;
For God doth know how many now in health
Shall drop their blood in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,
How you awake our sleeping sword of war.
We charge you in the name of God, take heed;
For never two such kingdoms did contend
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one a woe, a sore complaint
’Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this conjuration speak, my lord,
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart
That what you speak is in your conscience washed
As pure as sin with baptism.

CANTERBURY.
Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,
That owe yourselves, your lives, and services
To this imperial throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness’ claim to France
But this, which they produce from Pharamond:
_In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant_,
“No woman shall succeed in Salic land;”
Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
The founder of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
That the land Salic is in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;
Where Charles the Great, having subdu’d the Saxons,
There left behind and settled certain French;
Who, holding in disdain the German women
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Establish’d then this law, to wit, no female
Should be inheritrix in Salic land;
Which Salic, as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala,
Is at this day in Germany call’d Meissen.
Then doth it well appear the Salic law
Was not devised for the realm of France;
Nor did the French possess the Salic land
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly suppos’d the founder of this law,
Who died within the year of our redemption
Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
Subdu’d the Saxons, and did seat the French
Beyond the river Sala, in the year
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,
King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,
Did, as heir general, being descended
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
Make claim and title to the crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurp’d the crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male
Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,
To find his title with some shows of truth,
Though, in pure truth, it was corrupt and naught,
Convey’d himself as the heir to the Lady Lingare,
Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son
To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son
Of Charles the Great. Also, King Lewis the Tenth,
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied
That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorraine;
By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great
Was re-united to the crown of France.
So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun,
King Pepin’s title and Hugh Capet’s claim,
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear
To hold in right and title of the female.
So do the kings of France unto this day,
Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law
To bar your Highness claiming from the female,
And rather choose to hide them in a net
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles
Usurp’d from you and your progenitors.

KING HENRY.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?

CANTERBURY.
The sin upon my head, dread sovereign!
For in the Book of Numbers is it writ,
“When the man dies, let the inheritance
Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord,
Stand for your own! Unwind your bloody flag!
Look back into your mighty ancestors!
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb,
From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit,
And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground play’d a tragedy,
Making defeat on the full power of France,
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp
Forage in blood of French nobility.
O noble English, that could entertain
With half their forces the full pride of France
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work and cold for action!

ELY.
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
And with your puissant arm renew their feats.
You are their heir; you sit upon their throne;
The blood and courage that renowned them
Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege
Is in the very May-morn of his youth,
Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.

EXETER.
Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,
As did the former lions of your blood.

WESTMORLAND.
They know your Grace hath cause and means and might;
So hath your Highness. Never King of England
Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
And lie pavilion’d in the fields of France.

CANTERBURY.
O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,
With blood and sword and fire to win your right;
In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum
As never did the clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your ancestors.

KING HENRY.
We must not only arm to invade the French,
But lay down our proportions to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us
With all advantages.

CANTERBURY.
They of those marches, gracious sovereign,
Shall be a wall sufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers.

KING HENRY.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the main intendment of the Scot,
Who hath been still a giddy neighbour to us;
For you shall read that my great-grandfather
Never went with his forces into France
But that the Scot on his unfurnish’d kingdom
Came pouring, like the tide into a breach,
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,
Girdling with grievous siege castles and towns;
That England, being empty of defence,
Hath shook and trembled at the ill neighbourhood.

CANTERBURY.
She hath been then more fear’d than harm’d, my liege;
For hear her but exampl’d by herself:
When all her chivalry hath been in France,
And she a mourning widow of her nobles,
She hath herself not only well defended
But taken and impounded as a stray
The King of Scots; whom she did send to France
To fill King Edward’s fame with prisoner kings,
And make her chronicle as rich with praise
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
With sunken wreck and sumless treasuries.

WESTMORLAND.
But there’s a saying very old and true,
“If that you will France win,
Then with Scotland first begin.”
For once the eagle England being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
To tear and havoc more than she can eat.

EXETER.
It follows then the cat must stay at home;
Yet that is but a crush’d necessity,
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,
The advised head defends itself at home;
For government, though high and low and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like music.

CANTERBURY.
Therefore doth heaven divide
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavour in continual motion,
To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,
Obedience; for so work the honey-bees,
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
The act of order to a peopled kingdom.
They have a king and officers of sorts,
Where some, like magistrates, correct at home,
Others like merchants, venture trade abroad,
Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds,
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent-royal of their emperor;
Who, busied in his majesty, surveys
The singing masons building roofs of gold,
The civil citizens kneading up the honey,
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,
The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,
Delivering o’er to executors pale
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer,
That many things, having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously.
As many arrows, loosed several ways,
Come to one mark; as many ways meet in one town;
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;
As many lines close in the dial’s centre;
So many a thousand actions, once afoot,
End in one purpose, and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we, with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried and our nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy.

KING HENRY.
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.

 [_Exeunt some Attendants._]

Now are we well resolv’d; and, by God’s help,
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we’ll bend it to our awe,
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we’ll sit,
Ruling in large and ample empery
O’er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms,
Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombless, with no remembrance over them.
Either our history shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
Not worshipp’d with a waxen epitaph.

 Enter Ambassadors of France.

Now are we well prepar’d to know the pleasure
Of our fair cousin Dauphin; for we hear
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.

FIRST AMBASSADOR.
May’t please your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge,
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
The Dauphin’s meaning and our embassy?

KING HENRY.
We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fett’red in our prisons;
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
Tell us the Dauphin’s mind.

AMBASSADOR.
Thus, then, in few.
Your Highness, lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right
Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.
In answer of which claim, the prince our master
Says that you savour too much of your youth,
And bids you be advis’d there’s nought in France
That can be with a nimble galliard won.
You cannot revel into dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.

KING HENRY.
What treasure, uncle?

EXETER.
Tennis-balls, my liege.

KING HENRY.
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have match’d our rackets to these balls,
We will, in France, by God’s grace, play a set
Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler
That all the courts of France will be disturb’d
With chaces. And we understand him well,
How he comes o’er us with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valu’d this poor seat of England;
And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
To barbarous licence; as ’tis ever common
That men are merriest when they are from home.
But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness
When I do rouse me in my throne of France.
For that I have laid by my majesty
And plodded like a man for working days,
But I will rise there with so full a glory
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.
And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his
Hath turn’d his balls to gun-stones, and his soul
Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows
Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands,
Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
And some are yet ungotten and unborn
That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin’s scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal; and in whose name
Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on
To venge me as I may, and to put forth
My rightful hand in a well-hallow’d cause.
So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dauphin
His jest will savour but of shallow wit,
When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.—
Convey them with safe conduct.—Fare you well.

 [_Exeunt Ambassadors._]

EXETER.
This was a merry message.

KING HENRY.
We hope to make the sender blush at it.
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour
That may give furtherance to our expedition;
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore, let our proportions for these wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More feathers to our wings; for, God before,
We’ll chide this Dauphin at his father’s door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair action may on foot be brought.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT II

 Flourish. Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies.
Now thrive the armourers, and honour’s thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,
Following the mirror of all Christian kings,
With winged heels, as English Mercuries.
For now sits Expectation in the air,
And hides a sword from hilts unto the point
With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets,
Promis’d to Harry and his followers.
The French, advis’d by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England! model to thy inward greatness,
Like little body with a mighty heart,
What mightst thou do, that honour would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural!
But see thy fault! France hath in thee found out
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills
With treacherous crowns; and three corrupted men,
One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second,
Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,
Sir Thomas Grey, knight of Northumberland,
Have, for the gilt of France,—O guilt indeed!—
Confirm’d conspiracy with fearful France;
And by their hands this grace of kings must die,
If hell and treason hold their promises,
Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and we’ll digest
The abuse of distance, force a play.
The sum is paid; the traitors are agreed;
The King is set from London; and the scene
Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton.
There is the playhouse now, there must you sit;
And thence to France shall we convey you safe,
And bring you back, charming the narrow seas
To give you gentle pass; for, if we may,
We’ll not offend one stomach with our play.
But, till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. London. A street.

 Enter Corporal Nym and Lieutenant Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
Well met, Corporal Nym.

NYM.
Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.

BARDOLPH.
What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?

NYM.
For my part, I care not. I say little; but when time shall serve, there
shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may. I dare not fight, but I
will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple one, but what though?
It will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man’s sword
will; and there’s an end.

BARDOLPH.
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we’ll be all three
sworn brothers to France. Let it be so, good Corporal Nym.

NYM.
Faith, I will live so long as I may, that’s the certain of it; and when
I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is my rest, that is
the rendezvous of it.

BARDOLPH.
It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly; and
certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.

NYM.
I cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and they may
have their throats about them at that time; and some say knives have
edges. It must be as it may. Though patience be a tired mare, yet she
will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I cannot tell.

 Enter Pistol and Hostess.

BARDOLPH.
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife. Good Corporal, be patient here.
How now, mine host Pistol!

PISTOL.
Base tike, call’st thou me host?
Now, by this hand, I swear I scorn the term;
Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.

HOSTESS.
No, by my troth, not long; for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or
fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles,
but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight. [_Nym and Pistol
draw._] O well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now! We shall see wilful
adultery and murder committed.

BARDOLPH.
Good Lieutenant! good corporal! offer nothing here.

NYM.
Pish!

PISTOL.
Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear’d cur of Iceland!

HOSTESS.
Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword.

NYM.
Will you shog off? I would have you _solus_.

PISTOL.
_Solus_, egregious dog! O viper vile!
The _solus_ in thy most mervailous face;
The _solus_ in thy teeth, and in thy throat,
And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy,
And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth!
I do retort the _solus_ in thy bowels;
For I can take, and Pistol’s cock is up,
And flashing fire will follow.

NYM.
I am not Barbason; you cannot conjure me. I have an humour to knock you
indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you
with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I would
prick your guts a little, in good terms, as I may; and that’s the
humour of it.

PISTOL.
O braggart vile and damned furious wight!
The grave doth gape, and doting death is near,
Therefore exhale.

BARDOLPH.
Hear me, hear me what I say. He that strikes the first stroke I’ll run
him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.

 [_Draws._]

PISTOL.
An oath of mickle might; and fury shall abate.
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give.
Thy spirits are most tall.

NYM.
I will cut thy throat, one time or other, in fair terms: that is the
humour of it.

PISTOL.
“Couple a gorge!”
That is the word. I thee defy again.
O hound of Crete, think’st thou my spouse to get?
No! to the spital go,
And from the powdering tub of infamy
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid’s kind,
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.
I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
For the only she; and _pauca_, there’s enough.
Go to.

 Enter the Boy.

BOY.
Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master, and you, hostess. He is
very sick, and would to bed. Good Bardolph, put thy face between his
sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he’s very ill.

BARDOLPH.
Away, you rogue!

HOSTESS.
By my troth, he’ll yield the crow a pudding one of these days.
The King has kill’d his heart.
Good husband, come home presently.

 [_Exeunt Hostess and Boy._]

BARDOLPH.
Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to France together; why the
devil should we keep knives to cut one another’s throats?

PISTOL.
Let floods o’erswell, and fiends for food howl on!

NYM.
You’ll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?

PISTOL.
Base is the slave that pays.

NYM.
That now I will have: that’s the humour of it.

PISTOL.
As manhood shall compound. Push home.

 [_They draw._]

BARDOLPH.
By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I’ll kill him; by this
sword, I will.

PISTOL.
Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.

BARDOLPH.
Corporal Nym, and thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not,
why, then, be enemies with me too. Prithee, put up.

NYM.
I shall have my eight shillings I won from you at betting?

PISTOL.
A noble shalt thou have, and present pay;
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood.
I’ll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me.
Is not this just? For I shall sutler be
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.
Give me thy hand.

NYM.
I shall have my noble?

PISTOL.
In cash most justly paid.

NYM.
Well, then, that’s the humour of’t.

 Enter Hostess.

HOSTESS.
As ever you come of women, come in quickly to Sir John.
Ah, poor heart! he is so shak’d of a burning quotidian tertian,
that it is most lamentable to behold. Sweet men, come to him.

NYM.
The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that’s the even of it.

PISTOL.
Nym, thou hast spoke the right.
His heart is fracted and corroborate.

NYM.
The King is a good king; but it must be as it may; he passes some
humours and careers.

PISTOL.
Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, we will live.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Southampton. A council-chamber.

 Enter Exeter, Bedford and Westmorland.

BEDFORD.
’Fore God, his Grace is bold, to trust these traitors.

EXETER.
They shall be apprehended by and by.

WESTMORLAND.
How smooth and even they do bear themselves!
As if allegiance in their bosoms sat
Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.

BEDFORD.
The King hath note of all that they intend,
By interception which they dream not of.

EXETER.
Nay, but the man that was his bed-fellow,
Whom he hath dull’d and cloy’d with gracious favours,
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
His sovereign’s life to death and treachery.

 Trumpets sound. Enter King Henry, Scroop, Cambridge and Grey.

KING HENRY.
Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,
And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts.
Think you not that the powers we bear with us
Will cut their passage through the force of France,
Doing the execution and the act
For which we have in head assembled them?

SCROOP.
No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.

KING HENRY.
I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded
We carry not a heart with us from hence
That grows not in a fair consent with ours,
Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish
Success and conquest to attend on us.

CAMBRIDGE.
Never was monarch better fear’d and lov’d
Than is your Majesty. There’s not, I think, a subject
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness
Under the sweet shade of your government.

GREY.
True; those that were your father’s enemies
Have steep’d their galls in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty and of zeal.

KING HENRY.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit
According to the weight and worthiness.

SCROOP.
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labour shall refresh itself with hope,
To do your Grace incessant services.

KING HENRY.
We judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday,
That rail’d against our person. We consider
It was excess of wine that set him on,
And on his more advice we pardon him.

SCROOP.
That’s mercy, but too much security.
Let him be punish’d, sovereign, lest example
Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.

KING HENRY.
O, let us yet be merciful.

CAMBRIDGE.
So may your Highness, and yet punish too.

GREY.
Sir,
You show great mercy if you give him life
After the taste of much correction.

KING HENRY.
Alas, your too much love and care of me
Are heavy orisons ’gainst this poor wretch!
If little faults, proceeding on distemper,
Shall not be wink’d at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chew’d, swallow’d, and digested,
Appear before us? We’ll yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care
And tender preservation of our person,
Would have him punish’d. And now to our French causes.
Who are the late commissioners?

CAMBRIDGE.
I one, my lord.
Your Highness bade me ask for it today.

SCROOP.
So did you me, my liege.

GREY.
And I, my royal sovereign.

KING HENRY.
Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours;
There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham; and, sir knight,
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours.
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmorland, and uncle Exeter,
We will aboard tonight.—Why, how now, gentlemen!
What see you in those papers that you lose
So much complexion?—Look ye, how they change!
Their cheeks are paper.—Why, what read you there,
That have so cowarded and chas’d your blood
Out of appearance?

CAMBRIDGE.
I do confess my fault,
And do submit me to your Highness’ mercy.

GREY, SCROOP.
To which we all appeal.

KING HENRY.
The mercy that was quick in us but late,
By your own counsel is suppress’d and kill’d.
You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms,
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.
See you, my princes and my noble peers,
These English monsters! My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt our love was to accord
To furnish him with an appertinents
Belonging to his honour; and this man
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspir’d
And sworn unto the practices of France
To kill us here in Hampton; to the which
This knight, no less for bounty bound to us
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. But, O
What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop? thou cruel,
Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature!
Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew’st the very bottom of my soul,
That almost mightst have coin’d me into gold,
Wouldst thou have practis’d on me for thy use,—
May it be possible that foreign hire
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? ’Tis so strange,
That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.
Treason and murder ever kept together,
As two yoke-devils sworn to either’s purpose,
Working so grossly in a natural cause
That admiration did not whoop at them;
But thou, ’gainst all proportion, didst bring in
Wonder to wait on treason and on murder;
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence;
And other devils that suggest by treasons
Do botch and bungle up damnation
With patches, colours, and with forms being fetch’d
From glist’ring semblances of piety.
But he that temper’d thee bade thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
If that same demon that hath gull’d thee thus
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,
He might return to vasty Tartar back,
And tell the legions, “I can never win
A soul so easy as that Englishman’s.”
O, how hast thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned?
Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family?
Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?
Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger,
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,
Garnish’d and deck’d in modest complement,
Not working with the eye without the ear,
And but in purged judgement trusting neither?
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem.
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot
To mark the full-fraught man and best indued
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee;
For this revolt of thine, methinks, is like
Another fall of man. Their faults are open.
Arrest them to the answer of the law;
And God acquit them of their practices!

EXETER.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard Earl of
Cambridge.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry Lord Scroop of
Masham.
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas Grey, knight, of
Northumberland.

SCROOP.
Our purposes God justly hath discover’d,
And I repent my fault more than my death,
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.

CAMBRIDGE.
For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive
The sooner to effect what I intended.
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God and you to pardon me.

GREY.
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous treason
Than I do at this hour joy o’er myself,
Prevented from a damned enterprise.
My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.

KING HENRY.
God quit you in his mercy! Hear your sentence.
You have conspir’d against our royal person,
Join’d with an enemy proclaim’d, and from his coffers
Received the golden earnest of our death;
Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter,
His princes and his peers to servitude,
His subjects to oppression and contempt,
And his whole kingdom into desolation.
Touching our person seek we no revenge;
But we our kingdom’s safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
Poor miserable wretches, to your death,
The taste whereof God of his mercy give
You patience to endure, and true repentance
Of all your dear offences! Bear them hence.

 [_Exeunt Cambridge, Scroop and Grey, guarded._]

Now, lords, for France; the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you, as us, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
This dangerous treason lurking in our way
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now
But every rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear countrymen! Let us deliver
Our puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Cheerly to sea! The signs of war advance!
No king of England, if not king of France!

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE III. London. Before a tavern.

 Enter Pistol, Nym, Bardolph, Boy and Hostess.

HOSTESS.
Prithee, honey, sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.

PISTOL.
No; for my manly heart doth yearn.
Bardolph, be blithe; Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins;
Boy, bristle thy courage up; for Falstaff he is dead,
And we must yearn therefore.

BARDOLPH.
Would I were with him, wheresome’er he is, either in heaven or in hell!

HOSTESS.
Nay, sure, he’s not in hell. He’s in Arthur’s bosom, if ever man went
to Arthur’s bosom. ’A made a finer end and went away an it had been any
christom child. ’A parted even just between twelve and one, even at the
turning o’ the tide: for after I saw him fumble with the sheets, and
play with flowers, and smile upon his fingers’ ends, I knew there was
but one way; for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and ’a babbled of
green fields. “How now, Sir John!” quoth I; “what, man! be o’ good
cheer.” So ’a cried out, “God, God, God!” three or four times. Now I,
to comfort him, bid him ’a should not think of God; I hop’d there was
no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So ’a bade me
lay more clothes on his feet. I put my hand into the bed and felt them,
and they were as cold as any stone. Then I felt to his knees, and so
upward and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.

NYM.
They say he cried out of sack.

HOSTESS.
Ay, that ’a did.

BARDOLPH.
And of women.

HOSTESS.
Nay, that ’a did not.

BOY.
Yes, that ’a did; and said they were devils incarnate.

HOSTESS.
’A could never abide carnation; ’twas a colour he never liked.

BOY.
’A said once, the devil would have him about women.

HOSTESS.
’A did in some sort, indeed, handle women; but then he was rheumatic,
and talk’d of the whore of Babylon.

BOY.
Do you not remember, ’a saw a flea stick upon Bardolph’s nose, and ’a
said it was a black soul burning in hell-fire?

BARDOLPH.
Well, the fuel is gone that maintain’d that fire. That’s all the riches
I got in his service.

NYM.
Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.

PISTOL.
Come, let’s away. My love, give me thy lips.
Look to my chattels and my movables.
Let senses rule; the word is “Pitch and Pay.”
Trust none;
For oaths are straws, men’s faiths are wafer-cakes
And hold-fast is the only dog, my duck;
Therefore, _Caveto_ be thy counsellor.
Go, clear thy crystals. Yoke-fellows in arms,
Let us to France; like horse-leeches, my boys,
To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck!

BOY.
And that’s but unwholesome food, they say.

PISTOL.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.

BARDOLPH.
Farewell, hostess.

 [_Kissing her._]

NYM.
I cannot kiss; that is the humour of it; but, adieu.

PISTOL.
Let housewifery appear. Keep close, I thee command.

HOSTESS.
Farewell; adieu.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. France. The King’s palace.

 Flourish. Enter the French King, the Dauphin, the Dukes of Berry and
 Brittany, the Constable and others.

FRENCH KING.
Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
And more than carefully it us concerns
To answer royally in our defences.
Therefore the Dukes of Berry and of Brittany,
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
To line and new repair our towns of war
With men of courage and with means defendant;
For England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the sucking of a gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident
As fears may teach us out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English
Upon our fields.

DAUPHIN.
My most redoubted father,
It is most meet we arm us ’gainst the foe;
For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
Though war nor no known quarrel were in question,
But that defences, musters, preparations,
Should be maintain’d, assembled, and collected,
As were a war in expectation.
Therefore, I say, ’tis meet we all go forth
To view the sick and feeble parts of France.
And let us do it with no show of fear;
No, with no more than if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance;
For, my good liege, she is so idly king’d,
Her sceptre so fantastically borne
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
That fear attends her not.

CONSTABLE.
O peace, Prince Dauphin!
You are too much mistaken in this king.
Question your Grace the late ambassadors
With what great state he heard their embassy,
How well supplied with noble counsellors,
How modest in exception, and withal
How terrible in constant resolution,
And you shall find his vanities forespent
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly;
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
That shall first spring and be most delicate.

DAUPHIN.
Well, ’tis not so, my Lord High Constable;
But though we think it so, it is no matter.
In cases of defence ’tis best to weigh
The enemy more mighty than he seems,
So the proportions of defence are fill’d;
Which, of a weak and niggardly projection,
Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting
A little cloth.

FRENCH KING.
Think we King Harry strong;
And, Princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The kindred of him hath been flesh’d upon us;
And he is bred out of that bloody strain
That haunted us in our familiar paths.
Witness our too much memorable shame
When Cressy battle fatally was struck,
And all our princes captiv’d by the hand
Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales;
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing,
Up in the air, crown’d with the golden sun,
Saw his heroical seed, and smil’d to see him,
Mangle the work of nature and deface
The patterns that by God and by French fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem
Of that victorious stock; and let us fear
The native mightiness and fate of him.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Ambassadors from Harry King of England
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.

FRENCH KING.
We’ll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.

 [_Exeunt Messenger and certain Lords._]

You see this chase is hotly follow’d, friends.

DAUPHIN.
Turn head and stop pursuit; for coward dogs
Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten
Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,
Take up the English short, and let them know
Of what a monarchy you are the head.
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
As self-neglecting.

 Enter Exeter.

FRENCH KING.
From our brother of England?

EXETER.
From him; and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,
That you divest yourself, and lay apart
The borrowed glories that by gift of heaven,
By law of nature and of nations, ’longs
To him and to his heirs; namely, the crown
And all wide-stretched honours that pertain
By custom and the ordinance of times
Unto the crown of France. That you may know
’Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim
Pick’d from the worm-holes of long-vanish’d days,
Nor from the dust of old oblivion rak’d,
He sends you this most memorable line,
In every branch truly demonstrative;
Willing you overlook this pedigree;
And when you find him evenly deriv’d
From his most fam’d of famous ancestors,
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the native and true challenger.

FRENCH KING.
Or else what follows?

EXETER.
Bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
In thunder and in earthquake, like a Jove,
That, if requiring fail, he will compel;
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
Opens his vasty jaws; and on your head
Turning the widows’ tears, the orphans’ cries,
The dead men’s blood, the pining maidens’ groans,
For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers,
That shall be swallowed in this controversy.
This is his claim, his threat’ning, and my message;
Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
To whom expressly I bring greeting too.

FRENCH KING.
For us, we will consider of this further.
Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent
Back to our brother of England.

DAUPHIN.
For the Dauphin,
I stand here for him. What to him from England?

EXETER.
Scorn and defiance. Slight regard, contempt,
And anything that may not misbecome
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
Thus says my king: an if your father’s Highness
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,
He’ll call you to so hot an answer of it
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your trespass and return your mock
In second accent of his ordinance.

DAUPHIN.
Say, if my father render fair return,
It is against my will; for I desire
Nothing but odds with England. To that end,
As matching to his youth and vanity,
I did present him with the Paris balls.

EXETER.
He’ll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
Were it the mistress-court of mighty Europe;
And, be assur’d, you’ll find a difference,
As we his subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days
And these he masters now. Now he weighs time
Even to the utmost grain. That you shall read
In your own losses, if he stay in France.

FRENCH KING.
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.

 [_Flourish._]

EXETER.
Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king
Come here himself to question our delay;
For he is footed in this land already.

FRENCH KING.
You shall be soon dispatch’d with fair conditions.
A night is but small breath and little pause
To answer matters of this consequence.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT III

 Flourish. Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Thus with imagin’d wing our swift scene flies,
In motion of no less celerity
Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen
The well-appointed king at Hampton pier
Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet
With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning.
Play with your fancies; and in them behold
Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing;
Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give
To sounds confus’d; behold the threaden sails,
Borne with the invisible and creeping wind,
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow’d sea,
Breasting the lofty surge. O, do but think
You stand upon the rivage and behold
A city on the inconstant billows dancing;
For so appears this fleet majestical,
Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow!
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
And leave your England, as dead midnight still,
Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
Either past or not arriv’d to pith and puissance.
For who is he, whose chin is but enrich’d
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
These cull’d and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.
Suppose the ambassador from the French comes back,
Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
Katharine his daughter, and with her, to dowry,
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.
The offer likes not; and the nimble gunner
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,

 [_Alarum, and chambers go off._]

And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And eke out our performance with your mind.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. France. Before Harfleur.

 Alarum. Enter King Henry, Exeter, Bedford, Gloucester and Soldiers,
 with scaling-ladders.

KING HENRY.
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,
Or close the wall up with our English dead.
In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility;
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger;
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favour’d rage;
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon; let the brow o’erwhelm it
As fearfully as does a galled rock
O’erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swill’d with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide,
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height. On, on, you noblest English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof!
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheath’d their swords for lack of argument.
Dishonour not your mothers; now attest
That those whom you call’d fathers did beget you.
Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
And teach them how to war. And you, good yeomen,
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not;
For there is none of you so mean and base,
That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot!
Follow your spirit, and upon this charge
Cry, “God for Harry! England and Saint George!”

 [_Exeunt. Alarum, and chambers go off._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Nym, Bardolph, Pistol and Boy.

BARDOLPH.
On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!

NYM.
Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot; and, for mine own
part, I have not a case of lives. The humour of it is too hot; that is
the very plain-song of it.

PISTOL.
The plain-song is most just, for humours do abound.
Knocks go and come; God’s vassals drop and die;
    And sword and shield,
    In bloody field,
    Doth win immortal fame.

BOY.
Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all my fame for a
pot of ale and safety.

PISTOL.
And I.
    If wishes would prevail with me,
    My purpose should not fail with me,
    But thither would I hie.

BOY.
    As duly,
    But not as truly,
    As bird doth sing on bough.

 Enter Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!

 [_Driving them forward._]

PISTOL.
Be merciful, great Duke, to men of mould.
Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage,
Abate thy rage, great Duke!
Good bawcock, bate thy rage; use lenity, sweet chuck!

NYM.
These be good humours! Your honour wins bad humours.

 [_Exeunt all but Boy._]

BOY.
As young as I am, I have observ’d these three swashers. I am boy to
them all three; but all they three, though they would serve me, could
not be man to me; for indeed three such antics do not amount to a man.
For Bardolph, he is white-liver’d and red-fac’d; by the means whereof
’a faces it out, but fights not. For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue
and a quiet sword; by the means whereof ’a breaks words, and keeps
whole weapons. For Nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the
best men; and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest ’a should be
thought a coward. But his few bad words are match’d with as few good
deeds; for ’a never broke any man’s head but his own, and that was
against a post when he was drunk. They will steal anything, and call it
purchase. Bardolph stole a lute-case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold
it for three half-pence. Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in
filching, and in Calais they stole a fire-shovel. I knew by that piece
of service the men would carry coals. They would have me as familiar
with men’s pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers; which makes
much against my manhood, if I should take from another’s pocket to put
into mine; for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them,
and seek some better service. Their villainy goes against my weak
stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Gower and Fluellen.

GOWER.
Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines.
The Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.

FLUELLEN.
To the mines! Tell you the Duke, it is not so good to come to the
mines; for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of
the war. The concavities of it is not sufficient; for, look you, the
athversary, you may discuss unto the Duke, look you, is digt himself
four yard under the countermines. By Cheshu, I think ’a will plow up
all, if there is not better directions.

GOWER.
The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is
altogether directed by an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i’ faith.

FLUELLEN.
It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?

GOWER.
I think it be.

FLUELLEN.
By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. I will verify as much in his
beard. He has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars,
look you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy-dog.

 Enter Macmorris and Captain Jamy.

GOWER.
Here ’a comes; and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.

FLUELLEN.
Captain Jamy is a marvellous falorous gentleman, that is certain; and
of great expedition and knowledge in the anchient wars, upon my
particular knowledge of his directions. By Cheshu, he will maintain his
argument as well as any military man in the world, in the disciplines
of the pristine wars of the Romans.

JAMY.
I say gud-day, Captain Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
God-den to your worship, good Captain James.

GOWER.
How now, Captain Macmorris! have you quit the mines?
Have the pioneers given o’er?

MACMORRIS.
By Chrish, la! ’tish ill done! The work ish give over, the trompet
sound the retreat. By my hand I swear, and my father’s soul, the work
ish ill done; it ish give over. I would have blowed up the town, so
Chrish save me, la! in an hour. O, ’tish ill done, ’tish ill done; by
my hand, ’tish ill done!

FLUELLEN.
Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a
few disputations with you, as partly touching or concerning the
disciplines of the war, the Roman wars, in the way of argument, look
you, and friendly communication; partly to satisfy my opinion, and
partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the
direction of the military discipline; that is the point.

JAMY.
It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captains bath: and I sall quit you
with gud leve, as I may pick occasion; that sall I, marry.

MACMORRIS.
It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me. The day is hot, and the
weather, and the wars, and the King, and the Dukes. It is no time to
discourse. The town is beseech’d, and the trumpet call us to the
breach, and we talk, and, be Chrish, do nothing. ’Tis shame for us all.
So God sa’ me, ’tis shame to stand still; it is shame, by my hand; and
there is throats to be cut, and works to be done; and there ish nothing
done, so Chrish sa’ me, la!

JAMY.
By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, I’ll
de gud service, or I’ll lig i’ the grund for it; ay, or go to death;
and I’ll pay’t as valorously as I may, that sall I suerly do, that is
the breff and the long. Marry, I wad full fain heard some question
’tween you tway.

FLUELLEN.
Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your correction, there is
not many of your nation—

MACMORRIS.
Of my nation! What ish my nation? Ish a villain, and a bastard, and a
knave, and a rascal? What ish my nation? Who talks of my nation?

FLUELLEN.
Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, Captain
Macmorris, peradventure I shall think you do not use me with that
affability as in discretion you ought to use me, look you, being as
good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war, and in the
derivation of my birth, and in other particularities.

MACMORRIS.
I do not know you so good a man as myself. So Chrish save me,
I will cut off your head.

GOWER.
Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.

JAMY.
Ah! that’s a foul fault.

 [_A parley sounded._]

GOWER.
The town sounds a parley.

FLUELLEN.
Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be
required, look you, I will be so bold as to tell you I know the
disciplines of war; and there is an end.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Before the gates.

 The Governor and some citizens on the walls; the English forces below.
 Enter King Henry and his train.

KING HENRY.
How yet resolves the governor of the town?
This is the latest parle we will admit;
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves,
Or like to men proud of destruction
Defy us to our worst; for, as I am a soldier,
A name that in my thoughts becomes me best,
If I begin the battery once again,
I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur
Till in her ashes she lie buried.
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
And the flesh’d soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand shall range
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
Your fresh fair virgins and your flow’ring infants.
What is it then to me, if impious War,
Array’d in flames like to the prince of fiends,
Do with his smirch’d complexion all fell feats
Enlink’d to waste and desolation?
What is’t to me, when you yourselves are cause,
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing violation?
What rein can hold licentious wickedness
When down the hill he holds his fierce career?
We may as bootless spend our vain command
Upon the enraged soldiers in their spoil
As send precepts to the leviathan
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur,
Take pity of your town and of your people,
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
O’erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy.
If not, why, in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand
Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters;
Your fathers taken by the silver beards,
And their most reverend heads dash’d to the walls;
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes,
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confus’d
Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
At Herod’s bloody-hunting slaughtermen.
What say you? Will you yield, and this avoid,
Or, guilty in defence, be thus destroy’d?

GOVERNOR.
Our expectation hath this day an end.
The Dauphin, whom of succours we entreated,
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great King,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
Enter our gates; dispose of us and ours;
For we no longer are defensible.

KING HENRY.
Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harfleur; there remain,
And fortify it strongly ’gainst the French.
Use mercy to them all. For us, dear uncle,
The winter coming on, and sickness growing
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.
Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest;
Tomorrow for the march are we addrest.

 Flourish. The King and his train enter the town.

SCENE IV. The French King’s palace.

 Enter Katharine and Alice, an old Gentlewoman.

KATHARINE.
_Alice, tu as été en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage._

ALICE.
_Un peu, madame._

KATHARINE.
_Je te prie, m’enseignez; il faut que j’apprenne à parler.
Comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?_

ALICE.
_La main? Elle est appelée_ de hand.

KATHARINE.
De hand. _Et les doigts?_

ALICE.
_Les doigts? Ma foi, j’oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. Les
doigts? Je pense qu’ils sont appelés_ de fingres; _oui_, de fingres.

KATHARINE.
_La main_, de hand; _les doigts_, de fingres. _Je pense que je suis le
bon écolier; j’ai gagné deux mots d’anglais vitement. Comment
appelez-vous les ongles?_

ALICE.
_Les ongles? Nous les appelons_ de nails.

KATHARINE.
De nails. _Écoutez; dites-moi, si je parle bien:_ de hand, de fingres,
_et_ de nails.

ALICE.
_C’est bien dit, madame; il est fort bon anglais._

KATHARINE.
_Dites-moi l’anglais pour le bras._

ALICE.
De arm, _madame._

KATHARINE.
_Et le coude?_

ALICE.
D’elbow.

KATHARINE.
D’elbow. _Je m’en fais la répétition de tous les mots que vous m’avez
appris dès à présent._

ALICE.
_Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense._

KATHARINE.
_Excusez-moi, Alice. Écoutez:_ d’hand, de fingres, de nails, d’arm, de
bilbow.

ALICE.
D’elbow, _madame._

KATHARINE.
_O Seigneur Dieu, je m’en oublie!_ D’elbow.
_Comment appelez-vous le col?_

ALICE.
De nick, _madame._

KATHARINE.
De nick. _Et le menton?_

ALICE.
De chin.

KATHARINE.
De sin. _Le col_, de nick; _le menton_, de sin.

ALICE.
_Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en vérité, vous prononcez les mots aussi
droit que les natifs d’Angleterre._

KATHARINE.
_Je ne doute point d’apprendre, par la grâce de Dieu, et en peu de
temps._

ALICE.
_N’avez-vous pas déjà oublié ce que je vous ai enseigné?_

KATHARINE.
_Non, je réciterai à vous promptement:_ d’hand, de fingres, de mails,—

ALICE.
De nails, _madame._

KATHARINE.
De nails, de arm, de ilbow.

ALICE.
_Sauf votre honneur_, de elbow.

KATHARINE.
_Ainsi dis-je_, d’elbow, de nick, _et_ de sin. _Comment appelez-vous le
pied et la robe?_

ALICE.
De foot, _madame; et_ de coun.

KATHARINE.
De foot _et_ de coun! _O Seigneur Dieu! ils sont les mots de son
mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et non pour les dames
d’honneur d’user. Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les
seigneurs de France pour tout le monde. Foh!_ le foot _et_ le coun!
_Néanmoins, je réciterai une autre fois ma leçon ensemble:_ d’hand, de
fingres, de nails, d’arm, d’elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, de coun.

ALICE.
_Excellent, madame!_

KATHARINE.
_C’est assez pour une fois. Allons-nous à dîner._

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The same.

 Enter the King of France, the Dauphin, the Duke of Bourbon, the
 Constable of France and others.

FRENCH KING.
’Tis certain he hath pass’d the river Somme.

CONSTABLE.
And if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France; let us quit all
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.

DAUPHIN.
_O Dieu vivant_! shall a few sprays of us,
The emptying of our fathers’ luxury,
Our scions put in wild and savage stock,
Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,
And overlook their grafters?

BOURBON.
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
_Mort de ma vie_, if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom,
To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.

CONSTABLE.
_Dieu de batailles_, where have they this mettle?
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull,
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
A drench for sur-rein’d jades, their barley-broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Upon our houses’ thatch, whiles a more frosty people
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!
Poor we may call them in their native lords.

DAUPHIN.
By faith and honour,
Our madams mock at us, and plainly say
Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
To new-store France with bastard warriors.

BOURBON.
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos;
Saying our grace is only in our heels,
And that we are most lofty runaways.

FRENCH KING.
Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence.
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
Up, princes! and, with spirit of honour edged
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field!
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berry,
Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;
Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
Beaumont, Grandpré, Roussi, and Fauconbridge,
Foix, Lestrale, Boucicault, and Charolois;
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights,
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.
Go down upon him, you have power enough,
And in a captive chariot into Rouen
Bring him our prisoner.

CONSTABLE.
This becomes the great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famish’d in their march;
For I am sure, when he shall see our army,
He’ll drop his heart into the sink of fear
And for achievement offer us his ransom.

FRENCH KING.
Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,
And let him say to England that we send
To know what willing ransom he will give.
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.

DAUPHIN.
Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.

FRENCH KING.
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,
And quickly bring us word of England’s fall.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The English camp in Picardy.

 Enter Gower and Fluellen, meeting.

GOWER.
How now, Captain Fluellen! come you from the bridge?

FLUELLEN.
I assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.

GOWER.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?

FLUELLEN.
The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon; and a man that I
love and honour with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life,
and my living, and my uttermost power. He is not—God be praised and
blessed!—any hurt in the world; but keeps the bridge most valiantly,
with excellent discipline. There is an anchient lieutenant there at the
pridge, I think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as Mark
Antony; and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but I did see
him do as gallant service.

GOWER.
What do you call him?

FLUELLEN.
He is call’d Anchient Pistol.

GOWER.
I know him not.

 Enter Pistol.

FLUELLEN.
Here is the man.

PISTOL.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours.
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.

FLUELLEN.
Ay, I praise God; and I have merited some love at his hands.

PISTOL.
Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart,
And of buxom valour, hath by cruel fate
And giddy Fortune’s furious fickle wheel,
That goddess blind,
That stands upon the rolling restless stone—

FLUELLEN.
By your patience, Anchient Pistol. Fortune is painted blind, with a
muffler afore his eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is blind; and
she is painted also with a wheel, to signify to you, which is the moral
of it, that she is turning, and inconstant, and mutability, and
variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone,
which rolls, and rolls, and rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most
excellent description of it. Fortune is an excellent moral.

PISTOL.
Fortune is Bardolph’s foe, and frowns on him;
For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must ’a be,—
A damned death!
Let gallows gape for dog; let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate.
But Exeter hath given the doom of death
For pax of little price.
Therefore, go speak; the Duke will hear thy voice;
And let not Bardolph’s vital thread be cut
With edge of penny cord and vile reproach.
Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.

FLUELLEN.
Anchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.

PISTOL.
Why then, rejoice therefore.

FLUELLEN.
Certainly, anchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at; for if, look you,
he were my brother, I would desire the Duke to use his good pleasure,
and put him to execution; for discipline ought to be used.

PISTOL.
Die and be damn’d! and _fico_ for thy friendship!

FLUELLEN.
It is well.

PISTOL.
The fig of Spain.

 [_Exit._]

FLUELLEN.
Very good.

GOWER.
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. I remember him now; a bawd,
a cutpurse.

FLUELLEN.
I’ll assure you, ’a uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall
see in a summer’s day. But it is very well; what he has spoke to me,
that is well, I warrant you, when time is serve.

GOWER.
Why, ’t is a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars,
to grace himself at his return into London under the form of a soldier.
And such fellows are perfect in the great commanders’ names; and they
will learn you by rote where services were done; at such and such a
sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who
was shot, who disgrac’d, what terms the enemy stood on; and this they
con perfectly in the phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned
oaths: and what a beard of the general’s cut and a horrid suit of the
camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-wash’d wits, is wonderful to
be thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or
else you may be marvellously mistook.

FLUELLEN.
I tell you what, Captain Gower; I do perceive he is not the man that he
would gladly make show to the world he is. If I find a hole in his
coat, I will tell him my mind. [_Drum heard._] Hark you, the King is
coming, and I must speak with him from the pridge.

 Drum and colours. Enter King Henry, Gloucester and his poor soldiers.

God bless your Majesty!

KING HENRY.
How now, Fluellen! cam’st thou from the bridge?

FLUELLEN.
Ay, so please your Majesty. The Duke of Exeter has very gallantly
maintain’d the pridge. The French is gone off, look you; and there is
gallant and most prave passages. Marry, th’ athversary was have
possession of the pridge; but he is enforced to retire, and the Duke of
Exeter is master of the pridge. I can tell your Majesty, the Duke is a
prave man.

KING HENRY.
What men have you lost, Fluellen?

FLUELLEN.
The perdition of the athversary hath been very great, reasonable great.
Marry, for my part, I think the Duke hath lost never a man, but one
that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one Bardolph, if your
Majesty know the man. His face is all bubukles, and whelks, and knobs,
and flames o’ fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a
coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red; but his nose is
executed, and his fire’s out.

KING HENRY.
We would have all such offenders so cut off; and we give express
charge, that in our marches through the country, there be nothing
compell’d from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the
French upbraided or abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and
cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.

 Tucket. Enter Montjoy.

MONTJOY.
You know me by my habit.

KING HENRY.
Well then I know thee. What shall I know of thee?

MONTJOY.
My master’s mind.

KING HENRY.
Unfold it.

MONTJOY.
Thus says my King: Say thou to Harry of England: Though we seem’d dead,
we did but sleep; advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him
we could have rebuk’d him at Harfleur, but that we thought not good to
bruise an injury till it were full ripe. Now we speak upon our cue, and
our voice is imperial. England shall repent his folly, see his
weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his
ransom; which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we
have lost, the disgrace we have digested; which in weight to re-answer,
his pettishness would bow under. For our losses, his exchequer is too
poor; for the effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too
faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at our
feet, but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To this add defiance; and
tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose
condemnation is pronounc’d. So far my King and master; so much my
office.

KING HENRY.
What is thy name? I know thy quality.

MONTJOY.
Montjoy.

KING HENRY.
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy King I do not seek him now,
But could be willing to march on to Calais
Without impeachment; for, to say the sooth,
Though ’tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessen’d, and those few I have
Almost no better than so many French;
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive me, God,
That I do brag thus! This your air of France
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent.
Go therefore, tell thy master here I am;
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,
My army but a weak and sickly guard;
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,
Though France himself and such another neighbour
Stand in our way. There’s for thy labour, Montjoy.
Go, bid thy master well advise himself.
If we may pass, we will; if we be hind’red,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolour; and so, Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
We would not seek a battle, as we are;
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it.
So tell your master.

MONTJOY.
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.

 [_Exit._]

GLOUCESTER.
I hope they will not come upon us now.

KING HENRY.
We are in God’s hands, brother, not in theirs.
March to the bridge; it now draws toward night.
Beyond the river we’ll encamp ourselves,
And on tomorrow bid them march away.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The French camp, near Agincourt.

 Enter the Constable of France, the Lord Rambures, Orleans, Dauphin
 with others.

CONSTABLE.
Tut! I have the best armour of the world.
Would it were day!

ORLEANS.
You have an excellent armour; but let my horse have his due.

CONSTABLE.
It is the best horse of Europe.

ORLEANS.
Will it never be morning?

DAUPHIN.
My Lord of Orleans, and my Lord High Constable, you talk of horse and
armour?

ORLEANS.
You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.

DAUPHIN.
What a long night is this! I will not change my horse with any that
treads but on four pasterns. Ch’ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his
entrails were hairs; _le cheval volant_, the Pegasus, _qui a les
narines de feu!_ When I bestride him, I soar, I am a hawk. He trots the
air; the earth sings when he touches it; the basest horn of his hoof is
more musical than the pipe of Hermes.

ORLEANS.
He’s of the colour of the nutmeg.

DAUPHIN.
And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus. He is pure
air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in
him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. He is
indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.

CONSTABLE.
Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.

DAUPHIN.
It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like the bidding of a
monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.

ORLEANS.
No more, cousin.

DAUPHIN.
Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to
the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a
theme as fluent as the sea; turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and
my horse is argument for them all. ’Tis a subject for a sovereign to
reason on, and for a sovereign’s sovereign to ride on; and for the
world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particular
functions and wonder at him. I once writ a sonnet in his praise and
began thus: “Wonder of nature,”—

ORLEANS.
I have heard a sonnet begin so to one’s mistress.

DAUPHIN.
Then did they imitate that which I compos’d to my courser, for my horse
is my mistress.

ORLEANS.
Your mistress bears well.

DAUPHIN.
Me well; which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and
particular mistress.

CONSTABLE.
Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.

DAUPHIN.
So perhaps did yours.

CONSTABLE.
Mine was not bridled.

DAUPHIN.
O then belike she was old and gentle; and you rode, like a kern of
Ireland, your French hose off, and in your strait strossers.

CONSTABLE.
You have good judgment in horsemanship.

DAUPHIN.
Be warn’d by me, then; they that ride so and ride not warily, fall into
foul bogs. I had rather have my horse to my mistress.

CONSTABLE.
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.

DAUPHIN.
I tell thee, Constable, my mistress wears his own hair.

CONSTABLE.
I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow to my mistress.

DAUPHIN.
“_Le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement, et la truie lavée au
bourbier_.” Thou mak’st use of anything.

CONSTABLE.
Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so
little kin to the purpose.

RAMBURES.
My Lord Constable, the armour that I saw in your tent tonight, are
those stars or suns upon it?

CONSTABLE.
Stars, my lord.

DAUPHIN.
Some of them will fall tomorrow, I hope.

CONSTABLE.
And yet my sky shall not want.

DAUPHIN.
That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and ’twere more honour
some were away.

CONSTABLE.
Even as your horse bears your praises; who would trot as well, were
some of your brags dismounted.

DAUPHIN.
Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will it never be day? I
will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English
faces.

CONSTABLE.
I will not say so, for fear I should be fac’d out of my way. But I
would it were morning; for I would fain be about the ears of the
English.

RAMBURES.
Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?

CONSTABLE.
You must first go yourself to hazard, ere you have them.

DAUPHIN.
’Tis midnight; I’ll go arm myself.

 [_Exit._]

ORLEANS.
The Dauphin longs for morning.

RAMBURES.
He longs to eat the English.

CONSTABLE.
I think he will eat all he kills.

ORLEANS.
By the white hand of my lady, he’s a gallant prince.

CONSTABLE.
Swear by her foot that she may tread out the oath.

ORLEANS.
He is simply the most active gentleman of France.

CONSTABLE.
Doing is activity; and he will still be doing.

ORLEANS.
He never did harm, that I heard of.

CONSTABLE.
Nor will do none tomorrow. He will keep that good name still.

ORLEANS.
I know him to be valiant.

CONSTABLE.
I was told that by one that knows him better than you.

ORLEANS.
What’s he?

CONSTABLE.
Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he car’d not who knew it.

ORLEANS.
He needs not; it is no hidden virtue in him.

CONSTABLE.
By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. ’Tis
a hooded valour; and when it appears, it will bate.

ORLEANS.
“Ill will never said well.”

CONSTABLE.
I will cap that proverb with “There is flattery in friendship.”

ORLEANS.
And I will take up that with “Give the devil his due.”

CONSTABLE.
Well plac’d. There stands your friend for the devil; have at the very
eye of that proverb with “A pox of the devil.”

ORLEANS.
You are the better at proverbs, by how much “A fool’s bolt is soon
shot.”

CONSTABLE.
You have shot over.

ORLEANS.
’Tis not the first time you were overshot.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of
your tents.

CONSTABLE.
Who hath measur’d the ground?

MESSENGER.
The Lord Grandpré.

CONSTABLE.
A valiant and most expert gentleman. Would it were day! Alas, poor
Harry of England, he longs not for the dawning as we do.

ORLEANS.
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this King of England, to mope
with his fat-brain’d followers so far out of his knowledge!

CONSTABLE.
If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.

ORLEANS.
That they lack; for if their heads had any intellectual armour, they
could never wear such heavy head-pieces.

RAMBURES.
That island of England breeds very valiant creatures. Their mastiffs
are of unmatchable courage.

ORLEANS.
Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian bear and
have their heads crush’d like rotten apples! You may as well say,
that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.

CONSTABLE.
Just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious
and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives; and then,
give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like
wolves and fight like devils.

ORLEANS.
Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.

CONSTABLE.
Then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to
fight. Now is it time to arm. Come, shall we about it?

ORLEANS.
It is now two o’clock; but, let me see, by ten
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT IV

 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now entertain conjecture of a time
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
From camp to camp through the foul womb of night
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fix’d sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other’s watch;
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each battle sees the other’s umber’d face;
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the night’s dull ear; and from the tents
The armourers, accomplishing the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
And the third hour of drowsy morning name.
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
The confident and over-lusty French
Do the low-rated English play at dice;
And chide the cripple tardy-gaited Night
Who, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
The morning’s danger; and their gesture sad,
Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats,
Presented them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghosts. O now, who will behold
The royal captain of this ruin’d band
Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,
Let him cry, “Praise and glory on his head!”
For forth he goes and visits all his host,
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,
And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen.
Upon his royal face there is no note
How dread an army hath enrounded him;
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour
Unto the weary and all-watched night,
But freshly looks, and over-bears attaint
With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty;
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks.
A largess universal like the sun
His liberal eye doth give to everyone,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
A little touch of Harry in the night.
And so our scene must to the battle fly,
Where—O for pity!—we shall much disgrace
With four or five most vile and ragged foils,
Right ill-dispos’d in brawl ridiculous,
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,
Minding true things by what their mock’ries be.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. The English camp at Agincourt.

 Enter King Henry, Bedford and Gloucester.

KING HENRY.
Gloucester, ’tis true that we are in great danger;
The greater therefore should our courage be.
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Almighty!
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distil it out;
For our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward consciences,
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed,
And make a moral of the devil himself.

 Enter Erpingham.

Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham:
A good soft pillow for that good white head
Were better than a churlish turf of France.

ERPINGHAM.
Not so, my liege; this lodging likes me better,
Since I may say, “Now lie I like a king.”

KING HENRY.
’Tis good for men to love their present pains
Upon example; so the spirit is eased;
And when the mind is quick’ned, out of doubt,
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move,
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,
Commend me to the princes in our camp;
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my pavilion.

GLOUCESTER.
We shall, my liege.

ERPINGHAM.
Shall I attend your Grace?

KING HENRY.
No, my good knight;
Go with my brothers to my lords of England.
I and my bosom must debate a while,
And then I would no other company.

ERPINGHAM.
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!

 [_Exeunt all but King._]

KING HENRY.
God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speak’st cheerfully.

 Enter Pistol.

PISTOL.
_Qui vous là?_

KING HENRY.
A friend.

PISTOL.
Discuss unto me; art thou officer?
Or art thou base, common, and popular?

KING HENRY.
I am a gentleman of a company.

PISTOL.
Trail’st thou the puissant pike?

KING HENRY.
Even so. What are you?

PISTOL.
As good a gentleman as the Emperor.

KING HENRY.
Then you are a better than the King.

PISTOL.
The King’s a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
A lad of life, an imp of fame;
Of parents good, of fist most valiant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?

KING HENRY.
Harry le Roy.

PISTOL.
Le Roy! a Cornish name. Art thou of Cornish crew?

KING HENRY.
No, I am a Welshman.

PISTOL.
Know’st thou Fluellen?

KING HENRY.
Yes.

PISTOL.
Tell him I’ll knock his leek about his pate
Upon Saint Davy’s day.

KING HENRY.
Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that
about yours.

PISTOL.
Art thou his friend?

KING HENRY.
And his kinsman too.

PISTOL.
The _fico_ for thee, then!

KING HENRY.
I thank you. God be with you!

PISTOL.
My name is Pistol call’d.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
It sorts well with your fierceness.

 Enter Fluellen and Gower.

GOWER.
Captain Fluellen!

FLUELLEN.
So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower. It is the greatest
admiration in the universal world, when the true and anchient
prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. If you would take the
pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I
warrant you, that there is no tiddle taddle nor pibble pabble in
Pompey’s camp. I warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the
wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it, and the sobriety of it,
and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.

GOWER.
Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.

FLUELLEN.
If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet,
think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a
prating coxcomb? In your own conscience, now?

GOWER.
I will speak lower.

FLUELLEN.
I pray you and beseech you that you will.

 [_Exeunt Gower and Fluellen._]

KING HENRY.
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valour in this Welshman.

 Enter three soldiers, John Bates, Alexander Court and Michael
 Williams.

COURT.
Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?

BATES.
I think it be; but we have no great cause to desire the approach of
day.

WILLIAMS.
We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we shall never see
the end of it. Who goes there?

KING HENRY.
A friend.

WILLIAMS.
Under what captain serve you?

KING HENRY.
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.

WILLIAMS.
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman. I pray you, what thinks
he of our estate?

KING HENRY.
Even as men wreck’d upon a sand, that look to be wash’d off the next
tide.

BATES.
He hath not told his thought to the King?

KING HENRY.
No; nor it is not meet he should. For though I speak it to you, I think
the King is but a man as I am. The violet smells to him as it doth to
me; the element shows to him as it doth to me; all his senses have but
human conditions. His ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears
but a man; and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet,
when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees
reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same
relish as ours are; yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any
appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.

BATES.
He may show what outward courage he will; but I believe, as cold a
night as ’tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the neck; and so I
would he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.

KING HENRY.
By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the King: I think he would
not wish himself anywhere but where he is.

BATES.
Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed,
and a many poor men’s lives saved.

KING HENRY.
I dare say you love him not so ill, to wish him here alone, howsoever
you speak this to feel other men’s minds. Methinks I could not die
anywhere so contented as in the King’s company, his cause being just
and his quarrel honourable.

WILLIAMS.
That’s more than we know.

BATES.
Ay, or more than we should seek after; for we know enough, if we know
we are the King’s subjects. If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the
King wipes the crime of it out of us.

WILLIAMS.
But if the cause be not good, the King himself hath a heavy reckoning
to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopp’d off in a
battle, shall join together at the latter day and cry all, “We died at
such a place”; some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon
their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some
upon their children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die well that
die in a battle; for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when
blood is their argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be
a black matter for the King that led them to it; who to disobey were
against all proportion of subjection.

KING HENRY.
So, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully
miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule,
should be imposed upon his father that sent him; or if a servant, under
his master’s command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by
robbers and die in many irreconcil’d iniquities, you may call the
business of the master the author of the servant’s damnation. But this
is not so. The King is not bound to answer the particular endings of
his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant; for
they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services.
Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come
to the arbitrement of swords, can try it out with all unspotted
soldiers. Some peradventure have on them the guilt of premeditated and
contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of
perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored
the gentle bosom of Peace with pillage and robbery. Now, if these men
have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can
outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is his beadle,
war is his vengeance; so that here men are punish’d for before-breach
of the King’s laws in now the King’s quarrel. Where they feared the
death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they
perish. Then if they die unprovided, no more is the King guilty of
their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the
which they are now visited. Every subject’s duty is the King’s; but
every subject’s soul is his own. Therefore should every soldier in the
wars do as every sick man in his bed, wash every mote out of his
conscience; and dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the
time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained; and in him
that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making God so free an
offer, He let him outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach
others how they should prepare.

WILLIAMS.
’Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head, the
King is not to answer for it.

BATES.
I do not desire he should answer for me; and yet I determine to fight
lustily for him.

KING HENRY.
I myself heard the King say he would not be ransom’d.

WILLIAMS.
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully; but when our throats are
cut, he may be ransom’d, and we ne’er the wiser.

KING HENRY.
If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.

WILLIAMS.
You pay him then. That’s a perilous shot out of an elder-gun, that a
poor and a private displeasure can do against a monarch! You may as
well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a
peacock’s feather. You’ll never trust his word after! Come, ’tis a
foolish saying.

KING HENRY.
Your reproof is something too round. I should be angry with you, if the
time were convenient.

WILLIAMS.
Let it be a quarrel between us if you live.

KING HENRY.
I embrace it.

WILLIAMS.
How shall I know thee again?

KING HENRY.
Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my bonnet; then, if
ever thou dar’st acknowledge it, I will make it my quarrel.

WILLIAMS.
Here’s my glove; give me another of thine.

KING HENRY.
There.

WILLIAMS.
This will I also wear in my cap. If ever thou come to me and say, after
tomorrow, “This is my glove,” by this hand I will take thee a box on
the ear.

KING HENRY.
If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.

WILLIAMS.
Thou dar’st as well be hang’d.

KING HENRY.
Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the King’s company.

WILLIAMS.
Keep thy word; fare thee well.

BATES.
Be friends, you English fools, be friends. We have French quarrels
enough, if you could tell how to reckon.

KING HENRY.
Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one they will beat
us, for they bear them on their shoulders; but it is no English treason
to cut French crowns, and tomorrow the King himself will be a clipper.

 [_Exeunt soldiers._]

 Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls,
Our debts, our careful wives,
Our children, and our sins lay on the King!
We must bear all. O hard condition,
Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel
But his own wringing! What infinite heart’s ease
Must kings neglect, that private men enjoy!
And what have kings, that privates have not too,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idol Ceremony?
What kind of god art thou, that suffer’st more
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?
What are thy rents? What are thy comings in?
O Ceremony, show me but thy worth!
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form,
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Wherein thou art less happy being fear’d
Than they in fearing.
What drink’st thou oft, instead of homage sweet,
But poison’d flattery? O, be sick, great greatness,
And bid thy Ceremony give thee cure!
Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Canst thou, when thou command’st the beggar’s knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
That play’st so subtly with a king’s repose;
I am a king that find thee, and I know
’Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball,
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running ’fore the King,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That beats upon the high shore of this world,
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous Ceremony,—
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave,
Who with a body fill’d and vacant mind
Gets him to rest, cramm’d with distressful bread,
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night
Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn,
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
And follows so the ever-running year,
With profitable labour, to his grave:
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.
The slave, a member of the country’s peace,
Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots
What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.

 Enter Erpingham.

ERPINGHAM.
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
Seek through your camp to find you.

KING HENRY.
Good old knight,
Collect them all together at my tent.
I’ll be before thee.

ERPINGHAM.
I shall do’t, my lord.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
O God of battles! steel my soldiers’ hearts.
Possess them not with fear. Take from them now
The sense of reckoning, if the opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord,
O, not today, think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown!
I Richard’s body have interred new,
And on it have bestow’d more contrite tears
Than from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a day their wither’d hands hold up
Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have built
Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richard’s soul. More will I do;
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.

 Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
My liege!

KING HENRY.
My brother Gloucester’s voice? Ay;
I know thy errand, I will go with thee.
The day, my friends, and all things stay for me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The French camp.

 Enter the Dauphin, Orleans, Rambures and others.

ORLEANS.
The sun doth gild our armour; up, my lords!

DAUPHIN.
_Monte à cheval!_ My horse, _varlet! laquais_, ha!

ORLEANS.
O brave spirit!

DAUPHIN.
_Via, les eaux et terre!_

ORLEANS.
_Rien puis? L’air et feu?_

DAUPHIN.
_Cieux_, cousin Orleans.

 Enter Constable.

Now, my Lord Constable!

CONSTABLE.
Hark, how our steeds for present service neigh!

DAUPHIN.
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!

RAMBURES.
What, will you have them weep our horses’ blood?
How shall we, then, behold their natural tears?

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
The English are embattl’d, you French peers.

CONSTABLE.
To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse!
Do but behold yon poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands;
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain,
That our French gallants shall today draw out,
And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them,
The vapour of our valour will o’erturn them.
’Tis positive ’gainst all exceptions, lords,
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our squares of battle, were enough
To purge this field of such a hilding foe,
Though we upon this mountain’s basis by
Took stand for idle speculation,
But that our honours must not. What’s to say?
A very little little let us do,
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount;
For our approach shall so much dare the field
That England shall crouch down in fear and yield.

 Enter Grandpré.

GRANDPRÉ.
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-favouredly become the morning field.
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
And our air shakes them passing scornfully.
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar’d host,
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps;
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks
With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, drooping the hides and hips,
The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit
Lies foul with chew’d grass, still, and motionless;
And their executors, the knavish crows,
Fly o’er them, all impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit itself in words
To demonstrate the life of such a battle,
In life so lifeless as it shows itself.

CONSTABLE.
They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.

DAUPHIN.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits
And give their fasting horses provender,
And after fight with them?

CONSTABLE.
I stay but for my guard; on to the field!
I will the banner from a trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come, away!
The sun is high, and we outwear the day.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The English camp.

 Enter Gloucester, Bedford, Exeter, Erpingham, with all his host:
 Salisbury and Westmorland.

GLOUCESTER.
Where is the King?

BEDFORD.
The King himself is rode to view their battle.

WESTMORLAND.
Of fighting men they have full three-score thousand.

EXETER.
There’s five to one; besides, they all are fresh.

SALISBURY.
God’s arm strike with us! ’tis a fearful odds.
God be wi’ you, princes all; I’ll to my charge.
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
Then, joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu!

BEDFORD.
Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee!

EXETER.
Farewell, kind lord; fight valiantly today!
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
For thou art fram’d of the firm truth of valour.

 [_Exit Salisbury._]

BEDFORD.
He is as full of valour as of kindness,
Princely in both.

 Enter the King.

WESTMORLAND.
O that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England
That do no work today!

KING.
What’s he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmorland? No, my fair cousin.
If we are mark’d to die, we are enough
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
God’s will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires;
But if it be a sin to covet honour,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England.
God’s peace! I would not lose so great an honour
As one man more, methinks, would share from me
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmorland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart. His passport shall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse.
We would not die in that man’s company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is call’d the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
And say, “Tomorrow is Saint Crispian.”
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,
And say, “These wounds I had on Crispian’s day.”
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he’ll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford, and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remembered,
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers.
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now abed
Shall think themselves accurs’d they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.

 Enter Salisbury.

SALISBURY.
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed.
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.

KING HENRY.
All things are ready, if our minds be so.

WESTMORLAND.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!

KING HENRY.
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?

WESTMORLAND.
God’s will! my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!

KING HENRY.
Why, now thou hast unwish’d five thousand men,
Which likes me better than to wish us one.
You know your places. God be with you all!

 Tucket. Enter Montjoy.

MONTJOY.
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured overthrow;
For certainly thou art so near the gulf,
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind
Thy followers of repentance; that their souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
Must lie and fester.

KING HENRY.
Who hath sent thee now?

MONTJOY.
The Constable of France.

KING HENRY.
I pray thee, bear my former answer back:
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.
Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the lion’s skin
While the beast liv’d, was kill’d with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find native graves, upon the which, I trust,
Shall witness live in brass of this day’s work;
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They shall be fam’d; for there the sun shall greet them,
And draw their honours reeking up to heaven;
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
Mark then abounding valour in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullet’s grazing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of mortality.
Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable
We are but warriors for the working-day.
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch’d
With rainy marching in the painful field;
There’s not a piece of feather in our host—
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly—
And time hath worn us into slovenry;
But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
They’ll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new coats o’er the French soldiers’ heads
And turn them out of service. If they do this—
As, if God please, they shall,—my ransom then
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labour.
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald.
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
Which if they have as I will leave ’em them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.

MONTJOY.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well;
Thou never shalt hear herald any more.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
I fear thou’lt once more come again for ransom.

 Enter York.

YORK.
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
The leading of the vaward.

KING HENRY.
Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away;
And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The field of battle.

 Alarum. Excursions. Enter Pistol, French Soldier and Boy.

PISTOL.
Yield, cur!

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Je pense que vous êtes le gentilhomme de bonne qualité._

PISTOL.
_Qualité? Caleno custore me!_
Art thou a gentleman?
What is thy name? Discuss.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O Seigneur Dieu!_

PISTOL.
O, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman.
Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark:
O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,
Except, O signieur, thou do give to me
Egregious ransom.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O, prenez miséricorde! Ayez pitié de moi!_

PISTOL.
Moy shall not serve; I will have forty moys,
Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat
In drops of crimson blood.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Est-il impossible d’échapper la force de ton bras?_

PISTOL.
Brass, cur!
Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat,
Offer’st me brass?

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O pardonnez-moi!_

PISTOL.
Say’st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?
Come hither, boy; ask me this slave in French
What is his name.

BOY.
_Écoutez. Comment êtes-vous appelé?_

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Monsieur le Fer._

BOY.
He says his name is Master Fer.

PISTOL.
Master Fer! I’ll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him.
Discuss the same in French unto him.

BOY.
I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.

PISTOL.
Bid him prepare; for I will cut his throat.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Que dit-il, monsieur?_

BOY.
_Il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous prêt, car ce soldat
ici est disposé tout à cette heure de couper votre gorge._

PISTOL.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy,
Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;
Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_O, je vous supplie, pour l’amour de Dieu, me pardonner! Je suis le
gentilhomme de bonne maison; gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux
cents écus._

PISTOL.
What are his words?

BOY.
He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a good house; and
for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.

PISTOL.
Tell him my fury shall abate, and I
The crowns will take.

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Petit monsieur, que dit-il?_

BOY.
_Encore qu’il est contre son jurement de pardonner aucun prisonnier;
néanmoins, pour les écus que vous lui avez promis, il est content à
vous donner la liberté, le franchisement._

FRENCH SOLDIER.
_Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remerciements; et je m’estime
heureux que je suis tombé entre les mains d’un chevalier, je pense, le
plus brave, vaillant, et très distingué seigneur d’Angleterre._

PISTOL.
Expound unto me, boy.

BOY.
He gives you upon his knees, a thousand thanks; and he esteems himself
happy that he hath fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most
brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy _seigneur_ of England.

PISTOL.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Follow me!

BOY.
_Suivez-vous le grand capitaine._

 [_Exeunt Pistol and French Soldier._]

I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart; but the
saying is true, “The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph
and Nym had ten times more valour than this roaring devil i’ the old
play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger; and they
are both hang’d; and so would this be, if he durst steal anything
adventurously. I must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our
camp. The French might have a good prey of us, if he knew of it; for
there is none to guard it but boys.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE V. Another part of the field.

 Enter Constable, Orleans, Bourbon, Dauphin and Rambures.

CONSTABLE.
_O diable!_

ORLEANS.
_O Seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!_

DAUPHIN.
_Mort de ma vie!_ all is confounded, all!
Reproach and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our plumes.

 [_A short alarum._]

_O méchante Fortune!_ Do not run away.

CONSTABLE.
Why, all our ranks are broke.

DAUPHIN.
O perdurable shame! Let’s stab ourselves,
Be these the wretches that we play’d at dice for?

ORLEANS.
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?

BOURBON.
Shame and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
Let’s die in honour! Once more back again!
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand,
Like a base pandar, hold the chamber door
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminated.

CONSTABLE.
Disorder, that hath spoil’d us, friend us now!
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.

ORLEANS.
We are enough yet living in the field
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.

BOURBON.
The devil take order now! I’ll to the throng.
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Another part of the field.

 Alarum. Enter King Henry and his train, with prisoners.

KING HENRY.
Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen.
But all’s not done; yet keep the French the field.

EXETER.
The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.

KING HENRY.
Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour
I saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting.
From helmet to the spur all blood he was.

EXETER.
In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie,
Larding the plain; and by his bloody side,
Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first died; and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteeped,
And takes him by the beard; kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yawn upon his face.
He cries aloud, “Tarry, my cousin Suffolk!
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven;
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our chivalry.”
Upon these words I came and cheer’d him up.
He smil’d me in the face, raught me his hand,
And, with a feeble gripe, says, “Dear my lord,
Commend my service to my sovereign.”
So did he turn and over Suffolk’s neck
He threw his wounded arm and kiss’d his lips;
And so espous’d to death, with blood he seal’d
A testament of noble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner of it forc’d
Those waters from me which I would have stopp’d;
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes
And gave me up to tears.

KING HENRY.
I blame you not;
For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.

 [_Alarum._]

But hark! what new alarum is this same?
The French have reinforc’d their scatter’d men.
Then every soldier kill his prisoners;
Give the word through.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Another part of the field.

 Enter Fluellen and Gower.

FLUELLEN.
Kill the poys and the luggage! ’Tis expressly against the law of arms.
’Tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as can be offer’t; in
your conscience, now, is it not?

GOWER.
’Tis certain there’s not a boy left alive; and the cowardly rascals
that ran from the battle ha’ done this slaughter. Besides, they have
burned and carried away all that was in the King’s tent; wherefore the
King, most worthily, hath caus’d every soldier to cut his prisoner’s
throat. O, ’tis a gallant king!

FLUELLEN.
Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What call you the town’s
name where Alexander the Pig was born?

GOWER.
Alexander the Great.

FLUELLEN.
Why, I pray you, is not pig great? The pig, or the great, or the
mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save
the phrase is a little variations.

GOWER.
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was called
Philip of Macedon, as I take it.

FLUELLEN.
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I tell you, Captain,
if you look in the maps of the ’orld, I warrant you sall find, in the
comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, look
you, is both alike. There is a river in Macedon; and there is also
moreover a river at Monmouth; it is call’d Wye at Monmouth; but it is
out of my prains what is the name of the other river; but ’tis all one,
’tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in
both. If you mark Alexander’s life well, Harry of Monmouth’s life is
come after it indifferent well; for there is figures in all things.
Alexander, God knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and
his wraths, and his cholers, and his moods, and his displeasures, and
his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains,
did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend,
Cleitus.

GOWER.
Our King is not like him in that. He never kill’d any of his friends.

FLUELLEN.
It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth,
ere it is made and finished. I speak but in the figures and comparisons
of it. As Alexander kill’d his friend Cleitus, being in his ales and
his cups; so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right wits and his good
judgements, turn’d away the fat knight with the great belly doublet. He
was full of jests, and gipes, and knaveries, and mocks; I have forgot
his name.

GOWER.
Sir John Falstaff.

FLUELLEN.
That is he. I’ll tell you there is good men porn at Monmouth.

GOWER.
Here comes his Majesty.

 Alarum. Enter King Henry and forces; Warwick, Gloucester, Exeter with
 prisoners. Flourish.

KING HENRY.
I was not angry since I came to France
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald;
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill.
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field; they do offend our sight.
If they’ll do neither, we will come to them,
And make them skirr away, as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings.
Besides, we’ll cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.

 Enter Montjoy.

EXETER.
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.

GLOUCESTER.
His eyes are humbler than they us’d to be.

KING HENRY.
How now! what means this, herald? Know’st thou not
That I have fin’d these bones of mine for ransom?
Com’st thou again for ransom?

MONTJOY.
No, great King;
I come to thee for charitable license,
That we may wander o’er this bloody field
To book our dead, and then to bury them;
To sort our nobles from our common men.
For many of our princes—woe the while!—
Lie drown’d and soak’d in mercenary blood;
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of princes; and their wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great King,
To view the field in safety, and dispose
Of their dead bodies!

KING HENRY.
I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no;
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
And gallop o’er the field.

MONTJOY.
The day is yours.

KING HENRY.
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
What is this castle call’d that stands hard by?

MONTJOY.
They call it Agincourt.

KING HENRY.
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.

FLUELLEN.
Your grandfather of famous memory, an’t please your Majesty, and your
great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales, as I have read in the
chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in France.

KING HENRY.
They did, Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
Your Majesty says very true. If your Majesties is rememb’red of it, the
Welshmen did good service in garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks
in their Monmouth caps; which, your Majesty know, to this hour is an
honourable badge of the service; and I do believe your Majesty takes no
scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy’s day.

KING HENRY.
I wear it for a memorable honour;
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.

FLUELLEN.
All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty’s Welsh plood out of your
pody, I can tell you that. Got pless it and preserve it, as long as it
pleases His grace, and His majesty too!

KING HENRY.
Thanks, good my countryman.

FLUELLEN.
By Jeshu, I am your Majesty’s countryman, I care not who know it. I
will confess it to all the ’orld. I need not be asham’d of your
Majesty, praised be God, so long as your Majesty is an honest man.

KING HENRY.
God keep me so!

 Enter Williams.

Our heralds go with him;
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.

 [_Exeunt Heralds with Montjoy._]

EXETER.
Soldier, you must come to the King.

KING HENRY.
Soldier, why wear’st thou that glove in thy cap?

WILLIAMS.
An’t please your Majesty, ’tis the gage of one that I should fight
withal, if he be alive.

KING HENRY.
An Englishman?

WILLIAMS.
An’t please your Majesty, a rascal that swagger’d with me last night;
who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove, I have sworn to
take him a box o’ the ear; or if I can see my glove in his cap, which
he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, I will strike it
out soundly.

KING HENRY.
What think you, Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?

FLUELLEN.
He is a craven and a villain else, an’t please your Majesty, in my
conscience.

KING HENRY.
It may be his enemy is a gentlemen of great sort, quite from the answer
of his degree.

FLUELLEN.
Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as Lucifier and
Belzebub himself, it is necessary, look your Grace, that he keep his
vow and his oath. If he be perjur’d, see you now, his reputation is as
arrant a villain and a Jacksauce, as ever his black shoe trod upon
God’s ground and His earth, in my conscience, la!

KING HENRY.
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet’st the fellow.

WILLIAMS.
So I will, my liege, as I live.

KING HENRY.
Who serv’st thou under?

WILLIAMS.
Under Captain Gower, my liege.

FLUELLEN.
Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the
wars.

KING HENRY.
Call him hither to me, soldier.

WILLIAMS.
I will, my liege.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
Here, Fluellen; wear thou this favour for me and stick it in thy cap.
When Alençon and myself were down together, I pluck’d this glove from
his helm. If any man challenge this, he is a friend to Alençon, and an
enemy to our person. If thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou
dost me love.

FLUELLEN.
Your Grace does me as great honours as can be desir’d in the hearts of
his subjects. I would fain see the man, that has but two legs, that
shall find himself aggrief’d at this glove; that is all. But I would
fain see it once, an please God of His grace that I might see.

KING HENRY.
Know’st thou Gower?

FLUELLEN.
He is my dear friend, an please you.

KING HENRY.
Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.

FLUELLEN.
I will fetch him.

 [_Exit._]

KING HENRY.
My Lord of Warwick, and my brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.
The glove which I have given him for a favour
May haply purchase him a box o’ the ear.
It is the soldier’s; I by bargain should
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick.
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Some sudden mischief may arise of it;
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And, touch’d with choler, hot as gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury.
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.
Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VIII. Before King Henry’s pavilion.

 Enter Gower and Williams.

WILLIAMS.
I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.

 Enter Fluellen.

FLUELLEN.
God’s will and his pleasure, captain, I beseech you now, come apace to
the King. There is more good toward you peradventure than is in your
knowledge to dream of.

WILLIAMS.
Sir, know you this glove?

FLUELLEN.
Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.

WILLIAMS.
I know this; and thus I challenge it.

 [_Strikes him._]

FLUELLEN.
’Sblood! an arrant traitor as any is in the universal world, or in
France, or in England!

GOWER.
How now, sir! you villain!

WILLIAMS.
Do you think I’ll be forsworn?

FLUELLEN.
Stand away, Captain Gower. I will give treason his payment into plows,
I warrant you.

WILLIAMS.
I am no traitor.

FLUELLEN.
That’s a lie in thy throat. I charge you in his Majesty’s name,
apprehend him; he’s a friend of the Duke Alençon’s.

 Enter Warwick and Gloucester.

WARWICK.
How now, how now! what’s the matter?

FLUELLEN.
My lord of Warwick, here is—praised be God for it!—a most contagious
treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer’s day.
Here is his Majesty.

 Enter King Henry and Exeter.

KING HENRY.
How now! what’s the matter?

FLUELLEN.
My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your Grace, has
struck the glove which your Majesty is take out of the helmet of
Alençon.

WILLIAMS.
My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it; and he that I
gave it to in change promis’d to wear it in his cap. I promis’d to
strike him, if he did. I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I
have been as good as my word.

FLUELLEN.
Your Majesty hear now, saving your Majesty’s manhood, what an arrant,
rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is. I hope your Majesty is pear me
testimony and witness, and will avouchment, that this is the glove of
Alençon that your Majesty is give me; in your conscience, now?

KING HENRY.
Give me thy glove, soldier. Look, here is the fellow of it.
’Twas I, indeed, thou promisedst to strike;
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.

FLUELLEN.
An it please your Majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any
martial law in the world.

KING HENRY.
How canst thou make me satisfaction?

WILLIAMS.
All offences, my lord, come from the heart. Never came any from mine
that might offend your Majesty.

KING HENRY.
It was ourself thou didst abuse.

WILLIAMS.
Your Majesty came not like yourself. You appear’d to me but as a common
man; witness the night, your garments, your lowliness; and what your
Highness suffer’d under that shape, I beseech you take it for your own
fault and not mine; for had you been as I took you for, I made no
offence; therefore, I beseech your Highness, pardon me.

KING HENRY.
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns,
And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow;
And wear it for an honour in thy cap
Till I do challenge it. Give him his crowns;
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.

FLUELLEN.
By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly.
Hold, there is twelve pence for you; and I pray you to serve God, and
keep you out of prawls, and prabbles, and quarrels, and dissensions,
and, I warrant you, it is the better for you.

WILLIAMS.
I will none of your money.

FLUELLEN.
It is with a good will; I can tell you, it will serve you to mend your
shoes. Come, wherefore should you be so pashful? Your shoes is not so
good. ’Tis a good silling, I warrant you, or I will change it.

 Enter an English Herald.

KING HENRY.
Now, herald, are the dead numb’red?

HERALD.
Here is the number of the slaught’red French.

KING HENRY.
What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?

EXETER.
Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;
John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Boucicault:
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.

KING HENRY.
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lie slain; of princes, in this number,
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty-six; added to these,
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which,
Five hundred were but yesterday dubb’d knights;
So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries;
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral of France;
The master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures;
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dauphin,
John, Duke of Alençon, Anthony, Duke of Brabant,
The brother to the Duke of Burgundy,
And Edward, Duke of Bar; of lusty earls,
Grandpré and Roussi, Fauconbridge and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship of death!
Where is the number of our English dead?

 [_Herald gives him another paper._]

Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire;
None else of name; and of all other men
But five and twenty.—O God, thy arm was here;
And not to us, but to thy arm alone,
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
But in plain shock and even play of battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss
On one part and on the other? Take it, God,
For it is none but thine!

EXETER.
’Tis wonderful!

KING HENRY.
Come, go we in procession to the village;
And be it death proclaimed through our host
To boast of this or take that praise from God
Which is His only.

FLUELLEN.
Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to tell how many is kill’d?

KING HENRY.
Yes, Captain; but with this acknowledgment,
That God fought for us.

FLUELLEN.
Yes, my conscience, He did us great good.

KING HENRY.
Do we all holy rites.
Let there be sung _Non nobis_ and _Te Deum_,
The dead with charity enclos’d in clay,
And then to Calais; and to England then,
Where ne’er from France arriv’d more happy men.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT V

 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story,
That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Calais; grant him there; there seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth’d sea,
Which like a mighty whiffler ’fore the King
Seems to prepare his way. So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
You may imagine him upon Blackheath,
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
His bruised helmet and his bended sword
Before him through the city. He forbids it,
Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride;
Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent
Quite from himself to God. But now behold,
In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens!
The mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Like to the senators of th’ antique Rome,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in;
As, by a lower but loving likelihood,
Were now the general of our gracious empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
How many would the peaceful city quit,
To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him;
As yet the lamentation of the French
Invites the King of England’s stay at home,
The Emperor’s coming in behalf of France,
To order peace between them;—and omit
All the occurrences, whatever chanc’d,
Till Harry’s back-return again to France.
There must we bring him; and myself have play’d
The interim, by rememb’ring you ’tis past.
Then brook abridgement, and your eyes advance
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. France. The English camp.

 Enter Fluellen and Gower.

GOWER.
Nay, that’s right; but why wear you your leek today?
Saint Davy’s day is past.

FLUELLEN.
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things. I will
tell you ass my friend, Captain Gower. The rascally, scald, beggarly,
lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and yourself and all the world
know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is
come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me
eat my leek. It was in a place where I could not breed no contention
with him; but I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see him
once again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires.

 Enter Pistol.

GOWER.
Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.

FLUELLEN.
’Tis no matter for his swellings nor his turkey-cocks. God pless you,
Anchient Pistol! you scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you!

PISTOL.
Ha! art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Trojan,
To have me fold up Parca’s fatal web?
Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.

FLUELLEN.
I peseech you heartily, scurfy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my
requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek. Because, look
you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and
your digestions does not agree with it, I would desire you to eat it.

PISTOL.
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.

FLUELLEN.
There is one goat for you. [_Strikes him._] Will you be so good, scald
knave, as eat it?

PISTOL.
Base Trojan, thou shalt die.

FLUELLEN.
You say very true, scald knave, when God’s will is. I will desire you
to live in the mean time, and eat your victuals. Come, there is sauce
for it. [_Strikes him._] You call’d me yesterday mountain-squire; but I
will make you today a squire of low degree. I pray you, fall to; if you
can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.

GOWER.
Enough, captain; you have astonish’d him.

FLUELLEN.
I say, I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will peat his
pate four days. Bite, I pray you; it is good for your green wound and
your ploody coxcomb.

PISTOL.
Must I bite?

FLUELLEN.
Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question too, and
ambiguities.

PISTOL.
By this leek, I will most horribly revenge. I eat and eat, I swear—

FLUELLEN.
Eat, I pray you. Will you have some more sauce to your leek? There is
not enough leek to swear by.

PISTOL.
Quiet thy cudgel; thou dost see I eat.

FLUELLEN.
Much good do you, scald knave, heartily. Nay, pray you, throw none
away; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. When you take occasions
to see leeks hereafter, I pray you, mock at ’em; that is all.

PISTOL.
Good.

FLUELLEN.
Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.

PISTOL.
Me a groat!

FLUELLEN.
Yes, verily and in truth you shall take it; or I have another leek in
my pocket, which you shall eat.

PISTOL.
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.

FLUELLEN.
If I owe you anything I will pay you in cudgels. You shall be a
woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi’ you, and keep
you, and heal your pate.

 [_Exit._]

PISTOL.
All hell shall stir for this.

GOWER.
Go, go; you are a couterfeit cowardly knave. Will you mock at an
ancient tradition, begun upon an honourable respect, and worn as a
memorable trophy of predeceased valour, and dare not avouch in your
deeds any of your words? I have seen you gleeking and galling at this
gentleman twice or thrice. You thought, because he could not speak
English in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an English
cudgel. You find it otherwise; and henceforth let a Welsh correction
teach you a good English condition. Fare ye well.

 [_Exit._]

PISTOL.
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
News have I, that my Doll is dead i’ the spital
Of malady of France;
And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
Old I do wax; and from my weary limbs
Honour is cudgell’d. Well, bawd I’ll turn,
And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.
To England will I steal, and there I’ll steal;
And patches will I get unto these cudgell’d scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. France. A royal palace.

 Enter at one door, King Henry, Exeter, Bedford, Warwick, Gloucester,
 Westmorland, Clarence, Huntingdon and other Lords. At another, Queen
 Isabel, the French King, the Princess Katharine, Alice, and other
 Ladies; the Duke of Burgundy and other French.

KING HENRY.
Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met!
Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
Health and fair time of day; joy and good wishes
To our most fair and princely cousin Katharine;
And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contriv’d,
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy;
And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!

FRENCH KING.
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
Most worthy brother England; fairly met!
So are you, princes English, every one.

QUEEN ISABEL.
So happy be the issue, brother England,
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting
As we are now glad to behold your eyes;
Your eyes, which hitherto have borne in them
Against the French that met them in their bent
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks.
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
Have lost their quality; and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.

KING HENRY.
To cry amen to that, thus we appear.

QUEEN ISABEL.
You English princes all, I do salute you.

BURGUNDY.
My duty to you both, on equal love,
Great Kings of France and England! That I have labour’d,
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavours,
To bring your most imperial Majesties
Unto this bar and royal interview,
Your mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since then my office hath so far prevail’d
That, face to face and royal eye to eye,
You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me
If I demand, before this royal view,
What rub or what impediment there is,
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,
Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,
Should not in this best garden of the world,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chas’d,
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in it own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleach’d,
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
Put forth disorder’d twigs; her fallow leas
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
That should deracinate such savagery;
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,
Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
Losing both beauty and utility;
And as our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our houses and ourselves and children
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
The sciences that should become our country;
But grow like savages,—as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood,—
To swearing and stern looks, diffus’d attire,
And everything that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favour
You are assembled; and my speech entreats
That I may know the let, why gentle Peace
Should not expel these inconveniences
And bless us with her former qualities.

KING HENRY.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
Whose want gives growth to the imperfections
Which you have cited, you must buy that peace
With full accord to all our just demands;
Whose tenours and particular effects
You have enschedul’d briefly in your hands.

BURGUNDY.
The King hath heard them; to the which as yet
There is no answer made.

KING HENRY.
Well, then, the peace,
Which you before so urg’d, lies in his answer.

FRENCH KING.
I have but with a cursorary eye
O’erglanc’d the articles. Pleaseth your Grace
To appoint some of your council presently
To sit with us once more, with better heed
To re-survey them, we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.

KING HENRY.
Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King;
And take with you free power to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best
Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
Anything in or out of our demands,
And we’ll consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,
Go with the princes, or stay here with us?

QUEEN ISABEL.
Our gracious brother, I will go with them.
Haply a woman’s voice may do some good,
When articles too nicely urg’d be stood on.

KING HENRY.
Yet leave our cousin Katharine here with us:
She is our capital demand, compris’d
Within the fore-rank of our articles.

QUEEN ISABEL.
She hath good leave.

 [_Exeunt all except Henry, Katharine and Alice._]

KING HENRY.
Fair Katharine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
Such as will enter at a lady’s ear
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?

KATHARINE.
Your Majesty shall mock me; I cannot speak your England.

KING HENRY.
O fair Katharine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, I
will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue.
Do you like me, Kate?

KATHARINE.
_Pardonnez-moi_, I cannot tell wat is “like me.”

KING HENRY.
An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.

KATHARINE.
_Que dit-il? Que je suis semblable à les anges?_

ALICE.
_Oui, vraiment, sauf votre Grâce, ainsi dit-il._

KING HENRY.
I said so, dear Katharine; and I must not blush to affirm it.

KATHARINE.
_O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de tromperies._

KING HENRY.
What says she, fair one? That the tongues of men are full of deceits?

ALICE.
_Oui_, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dat is de
Princess.

KING HENRY.
The Princess is the better Englishwoman. I’ faith, Kate, my wooing is
fit for thy understanding. I am glad thou canst speak no better
English; for if thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king
that thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to buy my crown. I know no
ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, “I love you”; then if
you urge me farther than to say, “Do you in faith?” I wear out my suit.
Give me your answer; i’ faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. How
say you, lady?

KATHARINE.
_Sauf votre honneur_, me understand well.

KING HENRY.
Marry, if you would put me to verses, or to dance for your sake, Kate,
why you undid me; for the one, I have neither words nor measure, and
for the other I have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure
in strength. If I could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my
saddle with my armour on my back, under the correction of bragging be
it spoken, I should quickly leap into a wife. Or if I might buffet for
my love, or bound my horse for her favours, I could lay on like a
butcher and sit like a jack-an-apes, never off. But, before God, Kate,
I cannot look greenly, nor gasp out my eloquence, nor I have no cunning
in protestation; only downright oaths, which I never use till urg’d,
nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of this temper,
Kate, whose face is not worth sunburning, that never looks in his glass
for love of anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. I speak
to thee plain soldier. If thou canst love me for this, take me; if not,
to say to thee that I shall die, is true; but for thy love, by the
Lord, no; yet I love thee too. And while thou liv’st, dear Kate, take a
fellow of plain and uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do thee
right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other places; for these
fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies’
favours, they do always reason themselves out again. What! a speaker is
but a prater: a rhyme is but a ballad. A good leg will fall; a straight
back will stoop; a black beard will turn white; a curl’d pate will grow
bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye will wax hollow; but a good
heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon; or rather the sun and not the
moon; for it shines bright and never changes, but keeps his course
truly. If thou would have such a one, take me; and take me, take a
soldier; take a soldier, take a king. And what say’st thou then to my
love? Speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.

KATHARINE.
Is it possible dat I should love de enemy of France?

KING HENRY.
No; it is not possible you should love the enemy of France, Kate; but,
in loving me, you should love the friend of France; for I love France
so well that I will not part with a village of it, I will have it all
mine; and, Kate, when France is mine and I am yours, then yours is
France and you are mine.

KATHARINE.
I cannot tell wat is dat.

KING HENRY.
No, Kate? I will tell thee in French; which I am sure will hang upon my
tongue like a new-married wife about her husband’s neck, hardly to be
shook off. _Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand vous avez le
possession de moi_,—let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my
speed!—_donc votre est France, et vous êtes mienne._ It is as easy for
me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French. I
shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.

KATHARINE.
_Sauf votre honneur, le français que vous parlez, il est meilleur que
l’anglais lequel je parle._

KING HENRY.
No, faith, is’t not, Kate; but thy speaking of my tongue, and I thine,
most truly-falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one. But, Kate,
dost thou understand thus much English: canst thou love me?

KATHARINE.
I cannot tell.

KING HENRY.
Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? I’ll ask them. Come, I know thou
lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you’ll
question this gentlewoman about me; and I know, Kate, you will to her
dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. But, good
Kate, mock me mercifully; the rather, gentle princess, because I love
thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a saving faith
within me tells me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and thou must
therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. Shall not thou and I,
between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a boy, half French, half
English, that shall go to Constantinople and take the Turk by the
beard? Shall we not? What say’st thou, my fair flower-de-luce?

KATHARINE.
I do not know dat.

KING HENRY.
No; ’tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. Do but now promise,
Kate, you will endeavour for your French part of such a boy; and for my
English moiety, take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer you,
_la plus belle Katherine du monde, mon très cher et divin déesse?_

KATHARINE.
Your Majestee ’ave _fausse_ French enough to deceive de most _sage
demoiselle_ dat is _en France_.

KING HENRY.
Now, fie upon my false French! By mine honour, in true English, I love
thee, Kate; by which honour I dare not swear thou lovest me; yet my
blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and
untempering effect of my visage. Now, beshrew my father’s ambition! He
was thinking of civil wars when he got me; therefore was I created with
a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that, when I come to woo
ladies, I fright them. But, in faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better
I shall appear. My comfort is, that old age, that ill layer up of
beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. Thou hast me, if thou hast
me, at the worst; and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and
better; and therefore tell me, most fair Katharine, will you have me?
Put off your maiden blushes; avouch the thoughts of your heart with the
looks of an empress; take me by the hand, and say, Harry of England, I
am thine; which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but I
will tell thee aloud, England is thine, Ireland is thine, France is
thine, and Henry Plantagenet is thine; who, though I speak it before
his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the
best king of good fellows. Come, your answer in broken music; for thy
voice is music and thy English broken; therefore, queen of all,
Katharine, break thy mind to me in broken English. Wilt thou have me?

KATHARINE.
Dat is as it shall please _le roi mon père_.

KING HENRY.
Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.

KATHARINE.
Den it sall also content me.

KING HENRY.
Upon that I kiss your hand, and call you my queen.

KATHARINE.
_Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma foi, je ne veux point que
vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main d’une—Notre
Seigneur!—indigne serviteur. Excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon
très-puissant seigneur._

KING HENRY.
Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.

KATHARINE.
_Les dames et demoiselles pour être baisées devant leurs noces, il
n’est pas la coutume de France._

KING HENRY.
Madame my interpreter, what says she?

ALICE.
Dat it is not be de fashion _pour les_ ladies of France,—I cannot tell
wat is _baiser en_ Anglish.

KING HENRY.
To kiss.

ALICE.
Your Majestee _entend_ bettre _que moi_.

KING HENRY.
It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are
married, would she say?

ALICE.
_Oui, vraiment._

KING HENRY.
O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot
be confined within the weak list of a country’s fashion. We are the
makers of manners, Kate; and the liberty that follows our places stops
the mouth of all find-faults, as I will do yours, for upholding the
nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss; therefore, patiently
and yielding. [_Kissing her._] You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate;
there is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of
the French council; and they should sooner persuade Harry of England
than a general petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.

 Enter the French Power and the English Lords.

BURGUNDY.
God save your Majesty! My royal cousin, teach you our princess English?

KING HENRY.
I would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly I love her; and
that is good English.

BURGUNDY.
Is she not apt?

KING HENRY.
Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth; so that,
having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, I cannot
so conjure up the spirit of love in her, that he will appear in his
true likeness.

BURGUNDY.
Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you for that. If you
would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up Love in her
in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you blame her
then, being a maid yet ros’d over with the virgin crimson of modesty,
if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing
self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.

KING HENRY.
Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.

BURGUNDY.
They are then excus’d, my lord, when they see not what they do.

KING HENRY.
Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.

BURGUNDY.
I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know
my meaning; for maids, well summer’d and warm kept, are like flies at
Bartholomew-tide, blind, though they have their eyes; and then they
will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.

KING HENRY.
This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer; and so I shall catch
the fly, your cousin, in the latter end, and she must be blind too.

BURGUNDY.
As love is, my lord, before it loves.

KING HENRY.
It is so; and you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who
cannot see many a fair French city for one fair French maid that stands
in my way.

FRENCH KING.
Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turn’d into a
maid; for they are all girdled with maiden walls that no war hath
entered.

KING HENRY.
Shall Kate be my wife?

FRENCH KING.
So please you.

KING HENRY.
I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her; so the
maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my
will.

FRENCH KING.
We have consented to all terms of reason.

KING HENRY.
Is’t so, my lords of England?

WESTMORLAND.
The king hath granted every article;
His daughter first, and then in sequel all,
According to their firm proposed natures.

EXETER.
Only he hath not yet subscribed this: where your Majesty demands, that
the King of France, having any occasion to write for matter of grant,
shall name your Highness in this form and with this addition, in
French, _Notre très-cher fils Henri, Roi d’Angleterre, Héritier de
France_; and thus in Latin, _Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus,
rex Angliae et haeres Franciae._

FRENCH KING.
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied
But our request shall make me let it pass.

KING HENRY.
I pray you then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one article rank with the rest;
And thereupon give me your daughter.

FRENCH KING.
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each other’s happiness,
May cease their hatred; and this dear conjunction
Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
His bleeding sword ’twixt England and fair France.

LORDS.
Amen!

KING HENRY.
Now, welcome, Kate; and bear me witness all,
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.

 [_Flourish._]

QUEEN ISABEL.
God, the best maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there ’twixt your kingdoms such a spousal,
That never may ill office, or fell jealousy,
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate league;
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!

ALL.
Amen!

KING HENRY.
Prepare we for our marriage; on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy, we’ll take your oath,
And all the peers’, for surety of our leagues,
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me;
And may our oaths well kept and prosperous be!

 [_Sennet. Exeunt._]

EPILOGUE.

 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen,
Our bending author hath pursu’d the story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time, but in that small most greatly lived
This star of England. Fortune made his sword,
By which the world’s best garden he achieved,
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crown’d King
Of France and England, did this king succeed;
Whose state so many had the managing,
That they lost France and made his England bleed:
Which oft our stage hath shown; and, for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.

 [_Exit._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JULIUS CAESAR ***




cover




THE TRAGEDY OF
JULIUS CAESAR


by William Shakespeare




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Rome. A street
 Scene II. The same. A public place
 Scene III. The same. A street

 ACT II
 Scene I. Rome. Brutus’ orchard
 Scene II. A room in Caesar’s palace
 Scene III. A street near the Capitol
 Scene IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus

 ACT III
 Scene I. Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting
 Scene II. The same. The Forum
 Scene III. The same. A street

 ACT IV
 Scene I. A room in Antony’s house
 Scene II. Before Brutus’ tent, in the camp near Sardis
 Scene III. Within the tent of Brutus

 ACT V
 Scene I. The plains of Philippi
 Scene II. The same. The field of battle
 Scene III. Another part of the field
 Scene IV. Another part of the field
 Scene V. Another part of the field




 Dramatis Personæ


JULIUS CAESAR
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, Triumvir after his death.
MARCUS ANTONIUS,    ”    ”     ”
M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS,   ”    ”     ”
CICERO, PUBLIUS, POPILIUS LENA, Senators.
MARCUS BRUTUS, Conspirator against Caesar.
CASSIUS, ”    ”     ”
CASCA,   ”    ”     ”
TREBONIUS,     ”    ”     ”
LIGARIUS,”    ”     ”
DECIUS BRUTUS, ”    ”     ”
METELLUS CIMBER,     ”    ”     ”
CINNA,   ”    ”     ”
FLAVIUS, tribune
MARULLUS, tribune
ARTEMIDORUS, a Sophist of Cnidos.
A Soothsayer
CINNA, a poet.
Another Poet.
LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, MESSALA, young CATO, and VOLUMNIUS, Friends to
Brutus and Cassius.
VARRO, CLITUS, CLAUDIUS, STRATO, LUCIUS, DARDANIUS, Servants to Brutus
PINDARUS, Servant to Cassius

CALPHURNIA, wife to Caesar
PORTIA, wife to Brutus

The Ghost of Caesar

Senators, Citizens, Soldiers, Commoners, Messengers, and Servants.

SCENE: Rome, the conspirators’ camp near Sardis, and the plains of
Philippi.




ACT I

SCENE I. Rome. A street.


Enter Flavius, Marullus and a throng of Citizens.

FLAVIUS.
Hence! home, you idle creatures, get you home.
Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
Being mechanical, you ought not walk
Upon a labouring day without the sign
Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?

CARPENTER.
Why, sir, a carpenter.

MARULLUS.
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
You, sir, what trade are you?

COBBLER.
Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but, as you would say, a
cobbler.

MARULLUS.
But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.

COBBLER.
A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe conscience, which is
indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.

MARULLUS.
What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?

COBBLER.
Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me; yet, if you be out, sir, I
can mend you.

MARULLUS.
What mean’st thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy fellow!

COBBLER.
Why, sir, cobble you.

FLAVIUS.
Thou art a cobbler, art thou?

COBBLER.
Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl; I meddle with no
tradesman’s matters, nor women’s matters, but withal I am indeed, sir,
a surgeon to old shoes: when they are in great danger, I recover them.
As proper men as ever trod upon neat’s leather have gone upon my
handiwork.

FLAVIUS.
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?

COBBLER.
Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself into more work. But
indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar, and to rejoice in his
triumph.

MARULLUS.
Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome,
To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climb’d up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The livelong day with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds
Made in her concave shores?
And do you now put on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a holiday?
And do you now strew flowers in his way,
That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this ingratitude.

FLAVIUS.
Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault
Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.

[_Exeunt Citizens._]

See whether their basest metal be not mov’d;
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
This way will I. Disrobe the images,
If you do find them deck’d with ceremonies.

MARULLUS.
May we do so?
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.

FLAVIUS.
It is no matter; let no images
Be hung with Caesar’s trophies. I’ll about
And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing feathers pluck’d from Caesar’s wing
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar above the view of men,
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. A public place.

Enter, in procession, with music, Caesar; Antony, for the course;
Calphurnia, Portia, Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius and Casca; a great
crowd following, among them a Soothsayer.

CAESAR.
Calphurnia.

CASCA.
Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.

[_Music ceases._]

CAESAR.
Calphurnia.

CALPHURNIA.
Here, my lord.

CAESAR.
Stand you directly in Antonius’ way,
When he doth run his course. Antonius.

ANTONY.
Caesar, my lord?

CAESAR.
Forget not in your speed, Antonius,
To touch Calphurnia; for our elders say,
The barren, touched in this holy chase,
Shake off their sterile curse.

ANTONY.
I shall remember.
When Caesar says “Do this,” it is perform’d.

CAESAR.
Set on; and leave no ceremony out.

[_Music._]

SOOTHSAYER.
Caesar!

CAESAR.
Ha! Who calls?

CASCA.
Bid every noise be still; peace yet again!

[_Music ceases._]

CAESAR.
Who is it in the press that calls on me?
I hear a tongue shriller than all the music,
Cry “Caesar”! Speak. Caesar is turn’d to hear.

SOOTHSAYER.
Beware the Ides of March.

CAESAR.
What man is that?

BRUTUS.
A soothsayer bids you beware the Ides of March.

CAESAR.
Set him before me; let me see his face.

CASSIUS.
Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.

CAESAR.
What say’st thou to me now? Speak once again.

SOOTHSAYER.
Beware the Ides of March.

CAESAR.
He is a dreamer; let us leave him. Pass.

[_Sennet. Exeunt all but Brutus and Cassius._]

CASSIUS.
Will you go see the order of the course?

BRUTUS.
Not I.

CASSIUS.
I pray you, do.

BRUTUS.
I am not gamesome: I do lack some part
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;
I’ll leave you.

CASSIUS.
Brutus, I do observe you now of late:
I have not from your eyes that gentleness
And show of love as I was wont to have.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
Over your friend that loves you.

BRUTUS.
Cassius,
Be not deceived: if I have veil’d my look,
I turn the trouble of my countenance
Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
Of late with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to myself,
Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved
(Among which number, Cassius, be you one)
Nor construe any further my neglect,
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of love to other men.

CASSIUS.
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion;
By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?

BRUTUS.
No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
But by reflection, by some other thing.

CASSIUS.
’Tis just:
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
That you have no such mirrors as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow. I have heard
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
(Except immortal Caesar) speaking of Brutus,
And groaning underneath this age’s yoke,
Have wish’d that noble Brutus had his eyes.

BRUTUS.
Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
That you would have me seek into myself
For that which is not in me?

CASSIUS.
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear;
And since you know you cannot see yourself
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
Will modestly discover to yourself
That of yourself which you yet know not of.
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus:
Were I a common laugher, or did use
To stale with ordinary oaths my love
To every new protester; if you know
That I do fawn on men, and hug them hard,
And after scandal them; or if you know
That I profess myself in banqueting,
To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.

[_Flourish and shout._]

BRUTUS.
What means this shouting? I do fear the people
Choose Caesar for their king.

CASSIUS.
Ay, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.

BRUTUS.
I would not, Cassius; yet I love him well,
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it be aught toward the general good,
Set honour in one eye and death i’ the other,
And I will look on both indifferently;
For let the gods so speed me as I love
The name of honour more than I fear death.

CASSIUS.
I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward favour.
Well, honour is the subject of my story.
I cannot tell what you and other men
Think of this life; but, for my single self,
I had as lief not be as live to be
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Caesar; so were you;
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter’s cold as well as he:
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Caesar said to me, “Dar’st thou, Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And swim to yonder point?” Upon the word,
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,
And bade him follow: so indeed he did.
The torrent roar’d, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point propos’d,
Caesar cried, “Help me, Cassius, or I sink!”
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
Is now become a god; and Cassius is
A wretched creature, and must bend his body,
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him I did mark
How he did shake: ’tis true, this god did shake:
His coward lips did from their colour fly,
And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
Did lose his lustre. I did hear him groan:
Ay, and that tongue of his, that bade the Romans
Mark him, and write his speeches in their books,
Alas, it cried, “Give me some drink, Titinius,”
As a sick girl. Ye gods, it doth amaze me,
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world,
And bear the palm alone.

[_Shout. Flourish._]

BRUTUS.
Another general shout?
I do believe that these applauses are
For some new honours that are heap’d on Caesar.

CASSIUS.
Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs, and peep about
To find ourselves dishonourable graves.
Men at some time are masters of their fates:
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
“Brutus” and “Caesar”: what should be in that “Caesar”?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with ’em,
“Brutus” will start a spirit as soon as “Caesar.”
Now in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed,
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art sham’d!
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
When went there by an age since the great flood,
But it was fam’d with more than with one man?
When could they say, till now, that talk’d of Rome,
That her wide walls encompass’d but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
When there is in it but one only man.
O, you and I have heard our fathers say,
There was a Brutus once that would have brook’d
Th’ eternal devil to keep his state in Rome,
As easily as a king!

BRUTUS.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
What you would work me to, I have some aim:
How I have thought of this, and of these times,
I shall recount hereafter. For this present,
I would not, so with love I might entreat you,
Be any further mov’d. What you have said,
I will consider; what you have to say
I will with patience hear; and find a time
Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a villager
Than to repute himself a son of Rome
Under these hard conditions as this time
Is like to lay upon us.

CASSIUS.
I am glad that my weak words
Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.

Enter Caesar and his Train.

BRUTUS.
The games are done, and Caesar is returning.

CASSIUS.
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note today.

BRUTUS.
I will do so. But, look you, Cassius,
The angry spot doth glow on Caesar’s brow,
And all the rest look like a chidden train:
Calphurnia’s cheek is pale; and Cicero
Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
As we have seen him in the Capitol,
Being cross’d in conference by some senators.

CASSIUS.
Casca will tell us what the matter is.

CAESAR.
Antonius.

ANTONY.
Caesar?

CAESAR.
Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights:
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;
He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.

ANTONY.
Fear him not, Caesar; he’s not dangerous;
He is a noble Roman and well given.

CAESAR.
Would he were fatter! But I fear him not:
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
He is a great observer, and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music.
Seldom he smiles; and smiles in such a sort
As if he mock’d himself and scorn’d his spirit
That could be mov’d to smile at anything.
Such men as he be never at heart’s ease
Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be fear’d
Than what I fear; for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.

[_Exeunt Caesar and his Train. Casca stays._]

CASCA.
You pull’d me by the cloak; would you speak with me?

BRUTUS.
Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanc’d today,
That Caesar looks so sad.

CASCA.
Why, you were with him, were you not?

BRUTUS.
I should not then ask Casca what had chanc’d.

CASCA.
Why, there was a crown offer’d him; and being offer’d him, he put it by
with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.

BRUTUS.
What was the second noise for?

CASCA.
Why, for that too.

CASSIUS.
They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?

CASCA.
Why, for that too.

BRUTUS.
Was the crown offer’d him thrice?

CASCA.
Ay, marry, was’t, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than
other; and at every putting-by mine honest neighbours shouted.

CASSIUS.
Who offer’d him the crown?

CASCA.
Why, Antony.

BRUTUS.
Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.

CASCA.
I can as well be hang’d, as tell the manner of it: it was mere foolery;
I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown; yet ’twas not a
crown neither, ’twas one of these coronets; and, as I told you, he put
it by once: but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had
it. Then he offered it to him again: then he put it by again: but, to
my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he
offered it the third time; he put it the third time by; and still, as
he refus’d it, the rabblement hooted, and clapp’d their chopt hands,
and threw up their sweaty night-caps, and uttered such a deal of
stinking breath because Caesar refus’d the crown, that it had, almost,
choked Caesar, for he swooned, and fell down at it. And for mine own
part, I durst not laugh, for fear of opening my lips and receiving the
bad air.

CASSIUS.
But, soft! I pray you. What, did Caesar swoon?

CASCA.
He fell down in the market-place, and foam’d at mouth, and was
speechless.

BRUTUS.
’Tis very like: he hath the falling-sickness.

CASSIUS.
No, Caesar hath it not; but you, and I,
And honest Casca, we have the falling-sickness.

CASCA.
I know not what you mean by that; but I am sure Caesar fell down. If
the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him, according as he
pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the
theatre, I am no true man.

BRUTUS.
What said he when he came unto himself?

CASCA.
Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad
he refused the crown, he pluck’d me ope his doublet, and offer’d them
his throat to cut. And I had been a man of any occupation, if I would
not have taken him at a word, I would I might go to hell among the
rogues. And so he fell. When he came to himself again, he said, if he
had done or said anything amiss, he desir’d their worships to think it
was his infirmity. Three or four wenches where I stood cried, “Alas,
good soul!” and forgave him with all their hearts. But there’s no heed
to be taken of them: if Caesar had stabb’d their mothers, they would
have done no less.

BRUTUS.
And, after that, he came thus sad away?

CASCA.
Ay.

CASSIUS.
Did Cicero say anything?

CASCA.
Ay, he spoke Greek.

CASSIUS.
To what effect?

CASCA.
Nay, and I tell you that, I’ll ne’er look you i’ the face again. But
those that understood him smil’d at one another and shook their heads;
but for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more news
too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off Caesar’s images, are
put to silence. Fare you well. There was more foolery yet, if I could
remember it.

CASSIUS.
Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?

CASCA.
No, I am promis’d forth.

CASSIUS.
Will you dine with me tomorrow?

CASCA.
Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner worth the
eating.

CASSIUS.
Good. I will expect you.

CASCA.
Do so; farewell both.

[_Exit Casca._]

BRUTUS.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
He was quick mettle when he went to school.

CASSIUS.
So is he now in execution
Of any bold or noble enterprise,
However he puts on this tardy form.
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
With better appetite.

BRUTUS.
And so it is. For this time I will leave you:
Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
I will come home to you; or, if you will,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.

CASSIUS.
I will do so: till then, think of the world.

[_Exit Brutus._]

Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet I see,
Thy honourable metal may be wrought
From that it is dispos’d: therefore ’tis meet
That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
For who so firm that cannot be seduc’d?
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Cassius,
He should not humour me. I will this night,
In several hands, in at his windows throw,
As if they came from several citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his name; wherein obscurely
Caesar’s ambition shall be glanced at.
And after this, let Caesar seat him sure,
For we will shake him, or worse days endure.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. The same. A street.

Thunder and lightning. Enter, from opposite sides, Casca with his sword
drawn, and Cicero.

CICERO.
Good even, Casca: brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?

CASCA.
Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
I have seen tempests, when the scolding winds
Have riv’d the knotty oaks; and I have seen
Th’ ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam,
To be exalted with the threatening clouds:
But never till tonight, never till now,
Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
Or else the world too saucy with the gods,
Incenses them to send destruction.

CICERO.
Why, saw you anything more wonderful?

CASCA.
A common slave, you’d know him well by sight,
Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
Like twenty torches join’d, and yet his hand,
Not sensible of fire remain’d unscorch’d.
Besides, I ha’ not since put up my sword,
Against the Capitol I met a lion,
Who glared upon me, and went surly by,
Without annoying me. And there were drawn
Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,
Transformed with their fear; who swore they saw
Men, all in fire, walk up and down the streets.
And yesterday the bird of night did sit,
Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
Do so conjointly meet, let not men say,
“These are their reasons; they are natural”;
For I believe, they are portentous things
Unto the climate that they point upon.

CICERO.
Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
But men may construe things after their fashion,
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?

CASCA.
He doth, for he did bid Antonius
Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.

CICERO.
Goodnight then, Casca: this disturbed sky
Is not to walk in.

CASCA.
Farewell, Cicero.

[_Exit Cicero._]

Enter Cassius.

CASSIUS.
Who’s there?

CASCA.
A Roman.

CASSIUS.
Casca, by your voice.

CASCA.
Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!

CASSIUS.
A very pleasing night to honest men.

CASCA.
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?

CASSIUS.
Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
For my part, I have walk’d about the streets,
Submitting me unto the perilous night;
And, thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
Have bar’d my bosom to the thunder-stone;
And when the cross blue lightning seem’d to open
The breast of heaven, I did present myself
Even in the aim and very flash of it.

CASCA.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the Heavens?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble,
When the most mighty gods by tokens send
Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.

CASSIUS.
You are dull, Casca; and those sparks of life
That should be in a Roman you do want,
Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze,
And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder,
To see the strange impatience of the Heavens:
But if you would consider the true cause
Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
Why birds and beasts, from quality and kind;
Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
Why all these things change from their ordinance,
Their natures, and pre-formed faculties,
To monstrous quality; why, you shall find
That Heaven hath infus’d them with these spirits,
To make them instruments of fear and warning
Unto some monstrous state.
Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
Most like this dreadful night,
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars,
As doth the lion in the Capitol;
A man no mightier than thyself, or me,
In personal action; yet prodigious grown,
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.

CASCA.
’Tis Caesar that you mean; is it not, Cassius?

CASSIUS.
Let it be who it is: for Romans now
Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors;
But, woe the while! our fathers’ minds are dead,
And we are govern’d with our mothers’ spirits;
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.

CASCA.
Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow
Mean to establish Caesar as a king;
And he shall wear his crown by sea and land,
In every place, save here in Italy.

CASSIUS.
I know where I will wear this dagger then;
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius:
Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
If I know this, know all the world besides,
That part of tyranny that I do bear
I can shake off at pleasure.

[_Thunder still._]

CASCA.
So can I:
So every bondman in his own hand bears
The power to cancel his captivity.

CASSIUS.
And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf,
But that he sees the Romans are but sheep:
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
What rubbish, and what offal, when it serves
For the base matter to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,
Where hast thou led me? I, perhaps, speak this
Before a willing bondman: then I know
My answer must be made; but I am arm’d,
And dangers are to me indifferent.

CASCA.
You speak to Casca, and to such a man
That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand:
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
And I will set this foot of mine as far
As who goes farthest.

CASSIUS.
There’s a bargain made.
Now know you, Casca, I have mov’d already
Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
To undergo with me an enterprise
Of honourable-dangerous consequence;
And I do know by this, they stay for me
In Pompey’s Porch: for now, this fearful night,
There is no stir or walking in the streets;
And the complexion of the element
In favour’s like the work we have in hand,
Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.

Enter Cinna.

CASCA.
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.

CASSIUS.
’Tis Cinna; I do know him by his gait;
He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?

CINNA.
To find out you. Who’s that? Metellus Cimber?

CASSIUS.
No, it is Casca, one incorporate
To our attempts. Am I not stay’d for, Cinna?

CINNA.
I am glad on’t. What a fearful night is this!
There’s two or three of us have seen strange sights.

CASSIUS.
Am I not stay’d for? tell me.

CINNA.
Yes, you are. O Cassius, if you could
But win the noble Brutus to our party—

CASSIUS.
Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
And look you lay it in the praetor’s chair,
Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this
In at his window; set this up with wax
Upon old Brutus’ statue: all this done,
Repair to Pompey’s Porch, where you shall find us.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?

CINNA.
All but Metellus Cimber, and he’s gone
To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie,
And so bestow these papers as you bade me.

CASSIUS.
That done, repair to Pompey’s theatre.

[_Exit Cinna._]

Come, Casca, you and I will yet, ere day,
See Brutus at his house: three parts of him
Is ours already, and the man entire
Upon the next encounter, yields him ours.

CASCA.
O, he sits high in all the people’s hearts!
And that which would appear offence in us,
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness.

CASSIUS.
Him, and his worth, and our great need of him,
You have right well conceited. Let us go,
For it is after midnight; and ere day,
We will awake him, and be sure of him.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Rome. Brutus’ orchard.


Enter Brutus.

BRUTUS.
What, Lucius, ho!
I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
Give guess how near to day.—Lucius, I say!
I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Call’d you, my lord?

BRUTUS.
Get me a taper in my study, Lucius:
When it is lighted, come and call me here.

LUCIUS.
I will, my lord.

[_Exit._]

BRUTUS.
It must be by his death: and for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
But for the general. He would be crown’d:
How that might change his nature, there’s the question.
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that craves wary walking. Crown him?—that;
And then, I grant, we put a sting in him,
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th’ abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins
Remorse from power; and, to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known when his affections sway’d
More than his reason. But ’tis a common proof,
That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
But when he once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend. So Caesar may;
Then lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel
Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities:
And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg
Which hatch’d, would, as his kind grow mischievous;
And kill him in the shell.

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
Searching the window for a flint, I found
This paper, thus seal’d up, and I am sure
It did not lie there when I went to bed.

[_Gives him the letter._]

BRUTUS.
Get you to bed again; it is not day.
Is not tomorrow, boy, the Ides of March?

LUCIUS.
I know not, sir.

BRUTUS.
Look in the calendar, and bring me word.

LUCIUS.
I will, sir.

[_Exit._]

BRUTUS.
The exhalations, whizzing in the air
Give so much light that I may read by them.

[_Opens the letter and reads._]

_Brutus, thou sleep’st: awake and see thyself.
Shall Rome, &c. Speak, strike, redress!_
“Brutus, thou sleep’st: awake!”
Such instigations have been often dropp’d
Where I have took them up.
“Shall Rome, &c.” Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand under one man’s awe? What, Rome?
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
The Tarquin drive, when he was call’d a king.
“Speak, strike, redress!” Am I entreated
To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redress will follow, thou receivest
Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus.

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.

[_Knock within._]

BRUTUS.
’Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks.

[_Exit Lucius._]

Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream:
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council; and the state of man,
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.

Enter Lucius.

LUCIUS.
Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door,
Who doth desire to see you.

BRUTUS.
Is he alone?

LUCIUS.
No, sir, there are moe with him.

BRUTUS.
Do you know them?

LUCIUS.
No, sir, their hats are pluck’d about their ears,
And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them
By any mark of favour.

BRUTUS.
Let ’em enter.

[_Exit Lucius._]

They are the faction. O conspiracy,
Sham’st thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
When evils are most free? O, then, by day
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy;
Hide it in smiles and affability:
For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
Not Erebus itself were dim enough
To hide thee from prevention.

Enter Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinna, Metellus Cimber and Trebonius.

CASSIUS.
I think we are too bold upon your rest:
Good morrow, Brutus; do we trouble you?

BRUTUS.
I have been up this hour, awake all night.
Know I these men that come along with you?

CASSIUS.
Yes, every man of them; and no man here
But honours you; and everyone doth wish
You had but that opinion of yourself
Which every noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.

BRUTUS.
He is welcome hither.

CASSIUS.
This Decius Brutus.

BRUTUS.
He is welcome too.

CASSIUS.
This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.

BRUTUS.
They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
Betwixt your eyes and night?

CASSIUS.
Shall I entreat a word?

[_They whisper._]

DECIUS.
Here lies the east: doth not the day break here?

CASCA.
No.

CINNA.
O, pardon, sir, it doth; and yon grey lines
That fret the clouds are messengers of day.

CASCA.
You shall confess that you are both deceiv’d.
Here, as I point my sword, the Sun arises;
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence, up higher toward the North
He first presents his fire; and the high East
Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.

BRUTUS.
Give me your hands all over, one by one.

CASSIUS.
And let us swear our resolution.

BRUTUS.
No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
The sufferance of our souls, the time’s abuse—
If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
And every man hence to his idle bed.
So let high-sighted tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
To kindle cowards, and to steel with valour
The melting spirits of women; then, countrymen,
What need we any spur but our own cause
To prick us to redress? what other bond
Than secret Romans, that have spoke the word,
And will not palter? and what other oath
Than honesty to honesty engag’d,
That this shall be, or we will fall for it?
Swear priests and cowards, and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions, and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise,
Nor th’ insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
To think that or our cause or our performance
Did need an oath; when every drop of blood
That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
Is guilty of a several bastardy,
If he do break the smallest particle
Of any promise that hath pass’d from him.

CASSIUS.
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand very strong with us.

CASCA.
Let us not leave him out.

CINNA.
No, by no means.

METELLUS.
O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
Will purchase us a good opinion,
And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds.
It shall be said, his judgement rul’d our hands;
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity.

BRUTUS.
O, name him not; let us not break with him;
For he will never follow anything
That other men begin.

CASSIUS.
Then leave him out.

CASCA.
Indeed, he is not fit.

DECIUS.
Shall no man else be touch’d but only Caesar?

CASSIUS.
Decius, well urg’d. I think it is not meet,
Mark Antony, so well belov’d of Caesar,
Should outlive Caesar: we shall find of him
A shrewd contriver; and you know, his means,
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy us all; which to prevent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.

BRUTUS.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the head off, and then hack the limbs,
Like wrath in death, and envy afterwards;
For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
O, that we then could come by Caesar’s spirit,
And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
Let’s kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds.
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
Stir up their servants to an act of rage,
And after seem to chide ’em. This shall mark
Our purpose necessary, and not envious;
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be call’d purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him;
For he can do no more than Caesar’s arm
When Caesar’s head is off.

CASSIUS.
Yet I fear him;
For in the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar—

BRUTUS.
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himself; take thought and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should; for he is given
To sports, to wildness, and much company.

TREBONIUS.
There is no fear in him; let him not die;
For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.

[_Clock strikes._]

BRUTUS.
Peace! count the clock.

CASSIUS.
The clock hath stricken three.

TREBONIUS.
’Tis time to part.

CASSIUS.
But it is doubtful yet
Whether Caesar will come forth today or no;
For he is superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparent prodigies,
The unaccustom’d terror of this night,
And the persuasion of his augurers,
May hold him from the Capitol today.

DECIUS.
Never fear that: if he be so resolved,
I can o’ersway him, for he loves to hear
That unicorns may be betray’d with trees,
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Lions with toils, and men with flatterers.
But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
He says he does, being then most flattered.
Let me work;
For I can give his humour the true bent,
And I will bring him to the Capitol.

CASSIUS.
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.

BRUTUS.
By the eighth hour: is that the uttermost?

CINNA.
Be that the uttermost; and fail not then.

METELLUS.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey;
I wonder none of you have thought of him.

BRUTUS.
Now, good Metellus, go along by him:
He loves me well, and I have given him reason;
Send him but hither, and I’ll fashion him.

CASSIUS.
The morning comes upon’s. We’ll leave you, Brutus.
And, friends, disperse yourselves; but all remember
What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.

BRUTUS.
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it as our Roman actors do,
With untired spirits and formal constancy.
And so, good morrow to you everyone.

[_Exeunt all but Brutus._]

Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter;
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber:
Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.

Enter Portia.

PORTIA.
Brutus, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health thus to commit
Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.

PORTIA.
Nor for yours neither. Y’ have ungently, Brutus,
Stole from my bed; and yesternight at supper,
You suddenly arose, and walk’d about,
Musing and sighing, with your arms across;
And when I ask’d you what the matter was,
You star’d upon me with ungentle looks.
I urg’d you further; then you scratch’d your head,
And too impatiently stamp’d with your foot;
Yet I insisted, yet you answer’d not,
But with an angry wafture of your hand
Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
Which seem’d too much enkindled; and withal
Hoping it was but an effect of humour,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep;
And could it work so much upon your shape
As it hath much prevail’d on your condition,
I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.

BRUTUS.
I am not well in health, and that is all.

PORTIA.
Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
He would embrace the means to come by it.

BRUTUS.
Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.

PORTIA.
Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
To walk unbraced and suck up the humours
Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the night,
And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus;
You have some sick offence within your mind,
Which, by the right and virtue of my place,
I ought to know of: and, upon my knees,
I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
By all your vows of love, and that great vow
Which did incorporate and make us one,
That you unfold to me, your self, your half,
Why you are heavy, and what men tonight
Have had resort to you; for here have been
Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.

BRUTUS.
Kneel not, gentle Portia.

PORTIA.
I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
Is it excepted I should know no secrets
That appertain to you? Am I your self
But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus’ harlot, not his wife.

BRUTUS.
You are my true and honourable wife,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart.

PORTIA.
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
I grant I am a woman; but withal
A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife;
I grant I am a woman; but withal
A woman well reputed, Cato’s daughter.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
Being so father’d and so husbanded?
Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose ’em.
I have made strong proof of my constancy,
Giving myself a voluntary wound
Here, in the thigh: can I bear that with patience
And not my husband’s secrets?

BRUTUS.
O ye gods,
Render me worthy of this noble wife!

[_Knock._]

Hark, hark, one knocks. Portia, go in awhile;
And by and by thy bosom shall partake
The secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I will construe to thee,
All the charactery of my sad brows.
Leave me with haste.

[_Exit Portia._]

Enter Lucius with Ligarius.

Lucius, who’s that knocks?

LUCIUS.
Here is a sick man that would speak with you.

BRUTUS.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius, how?

LIGARIUS.
Vouchsafe good-morrow from a feeble tongue.

BRUTUS.
O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!

LIGARIUS.
I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
Any exploit worthy the name of honour.

BRUTUS.
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.

LIGARIUS.
By all the gods that Romans bow before,
I here discard my sickness. Soul of Rome!
Brave son, derived from honourable loins!
Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjur’d up
My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
And I will strive with things impossible,
Yea, get the better of them. What’s to do?

BRUTUS.
A piece of work that will make sick men whole.

LIGARIUS.
But are not some whole that we must make sick?

BRUTUS.
That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
I shall unfold to thee, as we are going,
To whom it must be done.

LIGARIUS.
Set on your foot,
And with a heart new-fir’d I follow you,
To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
That Brutus leads me on.

[_Thunder._]

BRUTUS.
Follow me then.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in Caesar’s palace.

Thunder and lightning. Enter Caesar, in his nightgown.

CAESAR.
Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight:
Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out,
“Help, ho! They murder Caesar!” Who’s within?

Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
My lord?

CAESAR.
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of success.

SERVANT.
I will, my lord.

[_Exit._]

Enter Calphurnia.

CALPHURNIA.
What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house today.

CAESAR.
Caesar shall forth. The things that threaten’d me
Ne’er look’d but on my back; when they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanished.

CALPHURNIA.
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
A lioness hath whelped in the streets,
And graves have yawn’d, and yielded up their dead;
Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds
In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,
And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
O Caesar, these things are beyond all use,
And I do fear them!

CAESAR.
What can be avoided
Whose end is purpos’d by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth; for these predictions
Are to the world in general as to Caesar.

CALPHURNIA.
When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.

CAESAR.
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear,
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.

Enter Servant.

What say the augurers?

SERVANT.
They would not have you to stir forth today.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beast.

CAESAR.
The gods do this in shame of cowardice:
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
If he should stay at home today for fear.
No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
We are two lions litter’d in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible,
And Caesar shall go forth.

CALPHURNIA.
Alas, my lord,
Your wisdom is consum’d in confidence.
Do not go forth today: call it my fear
That keeps you in the house, and not your own.
We’ll send Mark Antony to the Senate-house,
And he shall say you are not well today.
Let me upon my knee prevail in this.

CAESAR.
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humour, I will stay at home.

Enter Decius.

Here’s Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.

DECIUS.
Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar.
I come to fetch you to the Senate-house.

CAESAR.
And you are come in very happy time
To bear my greeting to the Senators,
And tell them that I will not come today.
Cannot, is false; and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.

CALPHURNIA.
Say he is sick.

CAESAR.
Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretch’d mine arm so far,
To be afeard to tell grey-beards the truth?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.

DECIUS.
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
Lest I be laugh’d at when I tell them so.

CAESAR.
The cause is in my will; I will not come.
That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know:
Calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home.
She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
Which like a fountain with an hundred spouts
Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans
Came smiling, and did bathe their hands in it.
And these does she apply for warnings and portents
And evils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begg’d that I will stay at home today.

DECIUS.
This dream is all amiss interpreted:
It was a vision fair and fortunate.
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bath’d,
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
This by Calphurnia’s dream is signified.

CAESAR.
And this way have you well expounded it.

DECIUS.
I have, when you have heard what I can say;
And know it now. The Senate have concluded
To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Apt to be render’d, for someone to say,
“Break up the Senate till another time,
When Caesar’s wife shall meet with better dreams.”
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
“Lo, Caesar is afraid”?
Pardon me, Caesar; for my dear dear love
To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
And reason to my love is liable.

CAESAR.
How foolish do your fears seem now, Calphurnia!
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Give me my robe, for I will go.

Enter Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Casca, Trebonius, Cinna and Publius.

And look where Publius is come to fetch me.

PUBLIUS.
Good morrow, Caesar.

CAESAR.
Welcome, Publius.
What, Brutus, are you stirr’d so early too?
Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,
Caesar was ne’er so much your enemy
As that same ague which hath made you lean.
What is’t o’clock?

BRUTUS.
Caesar, ’tis strucken eight.

CAESAR.
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.

Enter Antony.

See! Antony, that revels long a-nights,
Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.

ANTONY.
So to most noble Caesar.

CAESAR.
Bid them prepare within.
I am to blame to be thus waited for.
Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius!
I have an hour’s talk in store for you:
Remember that you call on me today;
Be near me, that I may remember you.

TREBONIUS.
Caesar, I will. [_Aside._] and so near will I be,
That your best friends shall wish I had been further.

CAESAR.
Good friends, go in, and taste some wine with me;
And we, like friends, will straightway go together.

BRUTUS.
[_Aside._] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A street near the Capitol.

Enter Artemidorus, reading a paper.

ARTEMIDORUS.
_“Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius; come not near Casca;
have an eye to Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark well Metellus Cimber;
Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast wrong’d Caius Ligarius. There
is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against Caesar. If
thou be’st not immortal, look about you: security gives way to
conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee!
Thy lover, Artemidorus.”_ Here will I stand till Caesar pass along, And
as a suitor will I give him this. My heart laments that virtue cannot
live Out of the teeth of emulation. If thou read this, O Caesar, thou
mayest live; If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.


[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus.

Enter Portia and Lucius.

PORTIA.
I pr’ythee, boy, run to the Senate-house;
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why dost thou stay?

LUCIUS.
To know my errand, madam.

PORTIA.
I would have had thee there and here again,
Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
[_Aside._] O constancy, be strong upon my side,
Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue!
I have a man’s mind, but a woman’s might.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
Art thou here yet?

LUCIUS.
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
And so return to you, and nothing else?

PORTIA.
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
For he went sickly forth: and take good note
What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
Hark, boy, what noise is that?

LUCIUS.
I hear none, madam.

PORTIA.
Pr’ythee, listen well.
I heard a bustling rumour, like a fray,
And the wind brings it from the Capitol.

LUCIUS.
Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.

Enter the Soothsayer.

PORTIA.
Come hither, fellow:
Which way hast thou been?

SOOTHSAYER.
At mine own house, good lady.

PORTIA.
What is’t o’clock?

SOOTHSAYER.
About the ninth hour, lady.

PORTIA.
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?

SOOTHSAYER.
Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand,
To see him pass on to the Capitol.

PORTIA.
Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?

SOOTHSAYER.
That I have, lady, if it will please Caesar
To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
I shall beseech him to befriend himself.

PORTIA.
Why, know’st thou any harm’s intended towards him?

SOOTHSAYER.
None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.
Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow.
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
Of Senators, of Praetors, common suitors,
Will crowd a feeble man almost to death:
I’ll get me to a place more void, and there
Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.

[_Exit._]

PORTIA.
I must go in.
[_Aside._] Ay me, how weak a thing
The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
Say I am merry; come to me again,
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting.


A crowd of people in the street leading to the Capitol. Flourish. Enter
Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius, Cinna,
Antony, Lepidus, Artemidorus, Publius, Popilius and the Soothsayer.

CAESAR.
The Ides of March are come.

SOOTHSAYER.
Ay, Caesar; but not gone.

ARTEMIDORUS.
Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.

DECIUS.
Trebonius doth desire you to o’er-read,
At your best leisure, this his humble suit.

ARTEMIDORUS.
O Caesar, read mine first; for mine’s a suit
That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.

CAESAR.
What touches us ourself shall be last serv’d.

ARTEMIDORUS.
Delay not, Caesar. Read it instantly.

CAESAR.
What, is the fellow mad?

PUBLIUS.
Sirrah, give place.

CASSIUS.
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.

Caesar enters the Capitol, the rest following. All the Senators rise.

POPILIUS.
I wish your enterprise today may thrive.

CASSIUS.
What enterprise, Popilius?

POPILIUS.
Fare you well.

[_Advances to Caesar._]

BRUTUS.
What said Popilius Lena?

CASSIUS.
He wish’d today our enterprise might thrive.
I fear our purpose is discovered.

BRUTUS.
Look how he makes to Caesar: mark him.

CASSIUS.
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.
Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay myself.

BRUTUS.
Cassius, be constant:
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
For look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.

CASSIUS.
Trebonius knows his time, for look you, Brutus,
He draws Mark Antony out of the way.

[_Exeunt Antony and Trebonius. Caesar and the Senators take their
seats._]

DECIUS.
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go,
And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.

BRUTUS.
He is address’d; press near and second him.

CINNA.
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.

CAESAR.
Are we all ready? What is now amiss
That Caesar and his Senate must redress?

METELLUS.
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
An humble heart.

[_Kneeling._]

CAESAR.
I must prevent thee, Cimber.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
And turn pre-ordinance and first decree
Into the law of children. Be not fond,
To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
That will be thaw’d from the true quality
With that which melteth fools; I mean sweet words,
Low-crooked curtsies, and base spaniel fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banished:
If thou dost bend, and pray, and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Know, Caesar dost not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied.

METELLUS.
Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
To sound more sweetly in great Caesar’s ear
For the repealing of my banish’d brother?

BRUTUS.
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar;
Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.

CAESAR.
What, Brutus?

CASSIUS.
Pardon, Caesar; Caesar, pardon:
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall,
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.

CAESAR.
I could be well mov’d, if I were as you;
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:
But I am constant as the northern star,
Of whose true-fix’d and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumber’d sparks,
They are all fire, and every one doth shine;
But there’s but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world; ’tis furnish’d well with men,
And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
Yet in the number I do know but one
That unassailable holds on his rank,
Unshak’d of motion: and that I am he,
Let me a little show it, even in this,
That I was constant Cimber should be banish’d,
And constant do remain to keep him so.

CINNA.
O Caesar,—

CAESAR.
Hence! wilt thou lift up Olympus?

DECIUS.
Great Caesar,—

CAESAR.
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?

CASCA.
Speak, hands, for me!

[_Casca stabs Caesar in the neck. Caesar catches hold of his arm. He is
then stabbed by several other Conspirators, and at last by Marcus
Brutus._]

CAESAR.
_Et tu, Brute?_—Then fall, Caesar!

[_Dies. The Senators and People retire in confusion._]

CINNA.
Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.

CASSIUS.
Some to the common pulpits and cry out,
“Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!”

BRUTUS.
People and Senators, be not affrighted.
Fly not; stand still; ambition’s debt is paid.

CASCA.
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.

DECIUS.
And Cassius too.

BRUTUS.
Where’s Publius?

CINNA.
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.

METELLUS.
Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar’s
Should chance—

BRUTUS.
Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer!
There is no harm intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.

CASSIUS.
And leave us, Publius; lest that the people
Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.

BRUTUS.
Do so; and let no man abide this deed
But we the doers.

Enter Trebonius.

CASSIUS.
Where’s Antony?

TREBONIUS.
Fled to his house amaz’d.
Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run,
As it were doomsday.

BRUTUS.
Fates, we will know your pleasures.
That we shall die, we know; ’tis but the time
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.

CASCA.
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.

BRUTUS.
Grant that, and then is death a benefit:
So are we Caesar’s friends, that have abridg’d
His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
And let us bathe our hands in Caesar’s blood
Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords:
Then walk we forth, even to the market-place,
And waving our red weapons o’er our heads,
Let’s all cry, “Peace, freedom, and liberty!”

CASSIUS.
Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
In States unborn, and accents yet unknown!

BRUTUS.
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompey’s basis lies along,
No worthier than the dust!

CASSIUS.
So oft as that shall be,
So often shall the knot of us be call’d
The men that gave their country liberty.

DECIUS.
What, shall we forth?

CASSIUS.
Ay, every man away.
Brutus shall lead; and we will grace his heels
With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.

Enter a Servant.

BRUTUS.
Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony’s.

SERVANT.
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel;
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down;
And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving;
Say I love Brutus and I honour him;
Say I fear’d Caesar, honour’d him, and lov’d him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
May safely come to him, and be resolv’d
How Caesar hath deserv’d to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
So well as Brutus living; but will follow
The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
Thorough the hazards of this untrod state,
With all true faith. So says my master Antony.

BRUTUS.
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
I never thought him worse.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
He shall be satisfied and, by my honour,
Depart untouch’d.

SERVANT.
I’ll fetch him presently.

[_Exit._]

BRUTUS.
I know that we shall have him well to friend.

CASSIUS.
I wish we may: but yet have I a mind
That fears him much; and my misgiving still
Falls shrewdly to the purpose.

Enter Antony.

BRUTUS.
But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark Antony.

ANTONY.
O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low?
Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank:
If I myself, there is no hour so fit
As Caesar’s death’s hour; nor no instrument
Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
With the most noble blood of all this world.
I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
I shall not find myself so apt to die.
No place will please me so, no means of death,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
The choice and master spirits of this age.

BRUTUS.
O Antony, beg not your death of us.
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
As by our hands and this our present act
You see we do; yet see you but our hands
And this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
And pity to the general wrong of Rome—
As fire drives out fire, so pity pity—
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
Of brothers’ temper, do receive you in
With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.

CASSIUS.
Your voice shall be as strong as any man’s
In the disposing of new dignities.

BRUTUS.
Only be patient till we have appeas’d
The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
And then we will deliver you the cause
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Have thus proceeded.

ANTONY.
I doubt not of your wisdom.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand.
Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
Gentlemen all—alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Either a coward or a flatterer.
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, ’tis true:
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death,
To see thy Antony making his peace,
Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
Most noble, in the presence of thy corse?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
It would become me better than to close
In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay’d, brave hart;
Here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand,
Sign’d in thy spoil, and crimson’d in thy lethe.
O world, thou wast the forest to this hart;
And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
How like a deer strucken by many princes,
Dost thou here lie!

CASSIUS.
Mark Antony,—

ANTONY.
Pardon me, Caius Cassius:
The enemies of Caesar shall say this;
Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.

CASSIUS.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
But what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be prick’d in number of our friends,
Or shall we on, and not depend on you?

ANTONY.
Therefore I took your hands; but was indeed
Sway’d from the point, by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all, and love you all,
Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons
Why, and wherein, Caesar was dangerous.

BRUTUS.
Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard
That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
You should be satisfied.

ANTONY.
That’s all I seek,
And am moreover suitor that I may
Produce his body to the market-place;
And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
Speak in the order of his funeral.

BRUTUS.
You shall, Mark Antony.

CASSIUS.
Brutus, a word with you.
[_Aside to Brutus._] You know not what you do. Do not consent
That Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be mov’d
By that which he will utter?

BRUTUS.
[_Aside to Cassius._] By your pardon:
I will myself into the pulpit first,
And show the reason of our Caesar’s death.
What Antony shall speak, I will protest
He speaks by leave and by permission;
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Have all true rights and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.

CASSIUS.
[_Aside to Brutus._] I know not what may fall; I like it not.

BRUTUS.
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar’s body.
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
And say you do’t by our permission;
Else shall you not have any hand at all
About his funeral. And you shall speak
In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended.

ANTONY.
Be it so;
I do desire no more.

BRUTUS.
Prepare the body, then, and follow us.

[_Exeunt all but Antony._]

ANTONY.
O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers.
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,
Which, like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue,
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
And dreadful objects so familiar,
That mothers shall but smile when they behold
Their infants quartered with the hands of war;
All pity chok’d with custom of fell deeds:
And Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge,
With Ate by his side come hot from Hell,
Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice
Cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war,
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
With carrion men, groaning for burial.

Enter a Servant.

You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?

SERVANT.
I do, Mark Antony.

ANTONY.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.

SERVANT.
He did receive his letters, and is coming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth,—
[_Seeing the body._] O Caesar!

ANTONY.
Thy heart is big, get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching; for mine eyes,
Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy master coming?

SERVANT.
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.

ANTONY.
Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanc’d.
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octavius yet.
Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile;
Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
Into the market-place: there shall I try,
In my oration, how the people take
The cruel issue of these bloody men;
According to the which thou shalt discourse
To young Octavius of the state of things.
Lend me your hand.

[_Exeunt with Caesar’s body._]

SCENE II. The same. The Forum.

Enter Brutus and goes into the pulpit, and Cassius, with a throng of
Citizens.

CITIZENS.
We will be satisfied; let us be satisfied.

BRUTUS.
Then follow me, and give me audience, friends.
Cassius, go you into the other street
And part the numbers.
Those that will hear me speak, let ’em stay here;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
And public reasons shall be rendered
Of Caesar’s death.

FIRST CITIZEN.
I will hear Brutus speak.

SECOND CITIZEN.
I will hear Cassius; and compare their reasons,
When severally we hear them rendered.

[_Exit Cassius, with some of the Citizens. Brutus goes into the
rostrum._]

THIRD CITIZEN.
The noble Brutus is ascended: silence!

BRUTUS.
Be patient till the last.
Romans, countrymen, and lovers, hear me for my cause; and be silent,
that you may hear. Believe me for mine honour, and have respect to mine
honour, that you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your
senses, that you may the better judge. If there be any in this
assembly, any dear friend of Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus’ love
to Caesar was no less than his. If then that friend demand why Brutus
rose against Caesar, this is my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less,
but that I loved Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were living, and die
all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live all free men? As Caesar
loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he
was valiant, I honour him; but, as he was ambitious, I slew him. There
is tears, for his love; joy for his fortune; honour for his valour; and
death, for his ambition. Who is here so base, that would be a bondman?
If any, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here so rude, that would
not be a Roman? If any, speak; for him have I offended. Who is here so
vile, that will not love his country? If any, speak; for him have I
offended. I pause for a reply.

CITIZENS.
None, Brutus, none.

BRUTUS.
Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar than you shall
do to Brutus. The question of his death is enroll’d in the Capitol, his
glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences enforc’d,
for which he suffered death.

Enter Antony and others, with Caesar’s body.

Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had no hand
in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a place in the
commonwealth; as which of you shall not? With this I depart, that, as I
slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I have the same dagger for
myself, when it shall please my country to need my death.

CITIZENS.
Live, Brutus! live, live!

FIRST CITIZEN.
Bring him with triumph home unto his house.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Give him a statue with his ancestors.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Let him be Caesar.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Caesar’s better parts
Shall be crown’d in Brutus.

FIRST CITIZEN.
We’ll bring him to his house with shouts and clamours.

BRUTUS.
My countrymen,—

SECOND CITIZEN.
Peace! Silence! Brutus speaks.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Peace, ho!

BRUTUS.
Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar’s corpse, and grace his speech
Tending to Caesar’s glories, which Mark Antony,
By our permission, is allow’d to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart,
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.

[_Exit._]

FIRST CITIZEN.
Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Let him go up into the public chair.
We’ll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.

ANTONY.
For Brutus’ sake, I am beholding to you.

[_Goes up._]

FOURTH CITIZEN.
What does he say of Brutus?

THIRD CITIZEN.
He says, for Brutus’ sake
He finds himself beholding to us all.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
’Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here!

FIRST CITIZEN.
This Caesar was a tyrant.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Nay, that’s certain.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Peace! let us hear what Antony can say.

ANTONY.
You gentle Romans,—

CITIZENS.
Peace, ho! let us hear him.

ANTONY.
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them,
The good is oft interred with their bones;
So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answer’d it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest,
For Brutus is an honourable man,
So are they all, all honourable men,
Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
But Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honourable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.
You all did see that on the Lupercal
I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And sure he is an honourable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause;
What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason. Bear with me.
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause till it come back to me.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.

SECOND CITIZEN.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Has he, masters?
I fear there will a worse come in his place.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Mark’d ye his words? He would not take the crown;
Therefore ’tis certain he was not ambitious.

FIRST CITIZEN.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.

THIRD CITIZEN.
There’s not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Now mark him; he begins again to speak.

ANTONY.
But yesterday the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the world; now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence.
O masters! If I were dispos’d to stir
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
Who, you all know, are honourable men.
I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Than I will wrong such honourable men.
But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar,
I found it in his closet; ’tis his will:
Let but the commons hear this testament,
Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read,
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds,
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood;
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
And, dying, mention it within their wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Unto their issue.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
We’ll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.

CITIZENS.
The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will.

ANTONY.
Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it.
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
And being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad.
’Tis good you know not that you are his heirs;
For if you should, O, what would come of it?

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Read the will! We’ll hear it, Antony;
You shall read us the will, Caesar’s will!

ANTONY.
Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
I have o’ershot myself to tell you of it.
I fear I wrong the honourable men
Whose daggers have stabb’d Caesar; I do fear it.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
They were traitors. Honourable men!

CITIZENS.
The will! The testament!

SECOND CITIZEN.
They were villains, murderers. The will! Read the will!

ANTONY.
You will compel me then to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
And let me show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend? and will you give me leave?

CITIZENS.
Come down.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Descend.

[_He comes down._]

THIRD CITIZEN.
You shall have leave.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
A ring! Stand round.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Room for Antony, most noble Antony!

ANTONY.
Nay, press not so upon me; stand far off.

CITIZENS.
Stand back; room! bear back.

ANTONY.
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle. I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on;
’Twas on a Summer’s evening, in his tent,
That day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through:
See what a rent the envious Casca made:
Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb’d;
And as he pluck’d his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar follow’d it,
As rushing out of doors, to be resolv’d
If Brutus so unkindly knock’d, or no;
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar lov’d him.
This was the most unkindest cut of all;
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms,
Quite vanquish’d him: then burst his mighty heart;
And in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey’s statue
Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
Whilst bloody treason flourish’d over us.
O, now you weep; and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here,
Here is himself, marr’d, as you see, with traitors.

FIRST CITIZEN.
O piteous spectacle!

SECOND CITIZEN.
O noble Caesar!

THIRD CITIZEN.
O woeful day!

FOURTH CITIZEN.
O traitors, villains!

FIRST CITIZEN.
O most bloody sight!

SECOND CITIZEN.
We will be revenged.

CITIZENS.
Revenge,—about,—seek,—burn,—fire,—kill,—slay,—let not a traitor live!

ANTONY.
Stay, countrymen.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.

SECOND CITIZEN.
We’ll hear him, we’ll follow him, we’ll die with him.

ANTONY.
Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honourable.
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them do it. They’re wise and honourable,
And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
I am no orator, as Brutus is;
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
That love my friend; and that they know full well
That gave me public leave to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
To stir men’s blood. I only speak right on.
I tell you that which you yourselves do know,
Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor poor dumb mouths,
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
In every wound of Caesar, that should move
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.

CITIZENS.
We’ll mutiny.

FIRST CITIZEN.
We’ll burn the house of Brutus.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Away, then! come, seek the conspirators.

ANTONY.
Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.

CITIZENS.
Peace, ho! Hear Antony; most noble Antony.

ANTONY.
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.

CITIZENS.
Most true; the will!—let’s stay, and hear the will.

ANTONY.
Here is the will, and under Caesar’s seal.
To every Roman citizen he gives,
To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his death.

THIRD CITIZEN.
O, royal Caesar!

ANTONY.
Hear me with patience.

CITIZENS.
Peace, ho!

ANTONY.
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
And to your heirs forever; common pleasures,
To walk abroad, and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar! when comes such another?

FIRST CITIZEN.
Never, never. Come, away, away!
We’ll burn his body in the holy place,
And with the brands fire the traitors’ houses.
Take up the body.

SECOND CITIZEN.
Go, fetch fire.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Pluck down benches.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Pluck down forms, windows, anything.

[_Exeunt Citizens, with the body._]

ANTONY.
Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
Take thou what course thou wilt!

Enter a Servant.

How now, fellow?

SERVANT.
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.

ANTONY.
Where is he?

SERVANT.
He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.

ANTONY.
And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will give us anything.

SERVANT.
I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.

ANTONY.
Belike they had some notice of the people,
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A street.

Enter Cinna, the poet, and after him the citizens.

CINNA.
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
Yet something leads me forth.

FIRST CITIZEN.
What is your name?

SECOND CITIZEN.
Whither are you going?

THIRD CITIZEN.
Where do you dwell?

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Are you a married man or a bachelor?

SECOND CITIZEN.
Answer every man directly.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Ay, and briefly.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Ay, and wisely.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Ay, and truly, you were best.

CINNA.
What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married
man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly and briefly,
wisely and truly. Wisely I say I am a bachelor.

SECOND CITIZEN.
That’s as much as to say they are fools that marry; you’ll bear me a
bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly.

CINNA.
Directly, I am going to Caesar’s funeral.

FIRST CITIZEN.
As a friend, or an enemy?

CINNA.
As a friend.

SECOND CITIZEN.
That matter is answered directly.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
For your dwelling, briefly.

CINNA.
Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Your name, sir, truly.

CINNA.
Truly, my name is Cinna.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Tear him to pieces! He’s a conspirator.

CINNA.
I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad verses.

CINNA.
I am not Cinna the conspirator.

FOURTH CITIZEN.
It is no matter, his name’s Cinna; pluck but his name out of his heart,
and turn him going.

THIRD CITIZEN.
Tear him, tear him! Come; brands, ho! firebrands. To Brutus’, to
Cassius’; burn all. Some to Decius’ house, and some to Casca’s, some to
Ligarius’. Away, go!

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Rome. A room in Antony’s house.


Enter Antony, Octavius and Lepidus, seated at a table.

ANTONY.
These many then shall die; their names are prick’d.

OCTAVIUS.
Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?

LEPIDUS.
I do consent,—

OCTAVIUS.
Prick him down, Antony.

LEPIDUS.
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
Who is your sister’s son, Mark Antony.

ANTONY.
He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar’s house;
Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in legacies.

LEPIDUS.
What, shall I find you here?

OCTAVIUS.
Or here, or at the Capitol.

[_Exit Lepidus._]

ANTONY.
This is a slight unmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
The three-fold world divided, he should stand
One of the three to share it?

OCTAVIUS.
So you thought him,
And took his voice who should be prick’d to die
In our black sentence and proscription.

ANTONY.
Octavius, I have seen more days than you;
And though we lay these honours on this man,
To ease ourselves of divers sland’rous loads,
He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
To groan and sweat under the business,
Either led or driven, as we point the way;
And having brought our treasure where we will,
Then take we down his load, and turn him off,
Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears,
And graze in commons.

OCTAVIUS.
You may do your will;
But he’s a tried and valiant soldier.

ANTONY.
So is my horse, Octavius; and for that
I do appoint him store of provender.
It is a creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
His corporal motion govern’d by my spirit.
And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
He must be taught, and train’d, and bid go forth:
A barren-spirited fellow; one that feeds
On objects, arts, and imitations,
Which, out of use and stal’d by other men,
Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
But as a property. And now, Octavius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are levying powers; we must straight make head.
Therefore let our alliance be combin’d,
Our best friends made, our means stretch’d;
And let us presently go sit in council,
How covert matters may be best disclos’d,
And open perils surest answered.

OCTAVIUS.
Let us do so: for we are at the stake,
And bay’d about with many enemies;
And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
Millions of mischiefs.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Before Brutus’ tent, in the camp near Sardis.

Drum. Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Titinius and Soldiers; Pindarus meeting
them; Lucius at some distance.

BRUTUS.
Stand, ho!

LUCILIUS.
Give the word, ho! and stand.

BRUTUS.
What now, Lucilius! is Cassius near?

LUCILIUS.
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his master.

[_Pindarus gives a letter to Brutus._]

BRUTUS.
He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
In his own change, or by ill officers,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
Things done, undone: but, if he be at hand,
I shall be satisfied.

PINDARUS.
I do not doubt
But that my noble master will appear
Such as he is, full of regard and honour.

BRUTUS.
He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius;
How he received you, let me be resolv’d.

LUCILIUS.
With courtesy and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances,
Nor with such free and friendly conference,
As he hath us’d of old.

BRUTUS.
Thou hast describ’d
A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
When love begins to sicken and decay
It useth an enforced ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;

[_Low march within._]

But when they should endure the bloody spur,
They fall their crests, and like deceitful jades
Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?

LUCILIUS.
They meant this night in Sardis to be quarter’d;
The greater part, the horse in general,
Are come with Cassius.

Enter Cassius and Soldiers.

BRUTUS.
Hark! he is arriv’d.
March gently on to meet him.

CASSIUS.
Stand, ho!

BRUTUS.
Stand, ho! Speak the word along.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Stand!

SECOND SOLDIER.
Stand!

THIRD SOLDIER.
Stand!

CASSIUS.
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.

BRUTUS.
Judge me, you gods; wrong I mine enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a brother?

CASSIUS.
Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs;
And when you do them—

BRUTUS.
Cassius, be content.
Speak your griefs softly, I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our armies here,
Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away;
Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
And I will give you audience.

CASSIUS.
Pindarus,
Bid our commanders lead their charges off
A little from this ground.

BRUTUS.
Lucilius, do you the like; and let no man
Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
Lucius and Titinius, guard our door.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Within the tent of Brutus.

Enter Brutus and Cassius.

CASSIUS.
That you have wrong’d me doth appear in this:
You have condemn’d and noted Lucius Pella
For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
Wherein my letters, praying on his side
Because I knew the man, were slighted off.

BRUTUS.
You wrong’d yourself to write in such a case.

CASSIUS.
In such a time as this it is not meet
That every nice offence should bear his comment.

BRUTUS.
Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemn’d to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold
To undeservers.

CASSIUS.
I an itching palm!
You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.

BRUTUS.
The name of Cassius honours this corruption,
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.

CASSIUS.
Chastisement!

BRUTUS.
Remember March, the Ides of March remember:
Did not great Julius bleed for justice’ sake?
What villain touch’d his body, that did stab,
And not for justice? What! Shall one of us,
That struck the foremost man of all this world
But for supporting robbers, shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,
And sell the mighty space of our large honours
For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
Than such a Roman.

CASSIUS.
Brutus, bait not me,
I’ll not endure it. You forget yourself,
To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.

BRUTUS.
Go to; you are not, Cassius.

CASSIUS.
I am.

BRUTUS.
I say you are not.

CASSIUS.
Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.

BRUTUS.
Away, slight man!

CASSIUS.
Is’t possible?

BRUTUS.
Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?

CASSIUS.
O ye gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?

BRUTUS.
All this? ay, more: fret till your proud heart break;
Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humour? By the gods,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you; for, from this day forth,
I’ll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
When you are waspish.

CASSIUS.
Is it come to this?

BRUTUS.
You say you are a better soldier:
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.

CASSIUS.
You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
I said, an elder soldier, not a better:
Did I say better?

BRUTUS.
If you did, I care not.

CASSIUS.
When Caesar liv’d, he durst not thus have mov’d me.

BRUTUS.
Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.

CASSIUS.
I durst not?

BRUTUS.
No.

CASSIUS.
What? durst not tempt him?

BRUTUS.
For your life you durst not.

CASSIUS.
Do not presume too much upon my love.
I may do that I shall be sorry for.

BRUTUS.
You have done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
For I am arm’d so strong in honesty,
That they pass by me as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;
For I can raise no money by vile means:
By Heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answer’d Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces!

CASSIUS.
I denied you not.

BRUTUS.
You did.

CASSIUS.
I did not. He was but a fool
That brought my answer back. Brutus hath riv’d my heart.
A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

BRUTUS.
I do not, till you practise them on me.

CASSIUS.
You love me not.

BRUTUS.
I do not like your faults.

CASSIUS.
A friendly eye could never see such faults.

BRUTUS.
A flatterer’s would not, though they do appear
As huge as high Olympus.

CASSIUS.
Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is a-weary of the world:
Hated by one he loves; brav’d by his brother;
Check’d like a bondman; all his faults observ’d,
Set in a note-book, learn’d and conn’d by rote,
To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
And here my naked breast; within, a heart
Dearer than Plutus’ mine, richer than gold:
If that thou be’st a Roman, take it forth.
I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
Strike as thou didst at Caesar; for I know,
When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.

BRUTUS.
Sheathe your dagger.
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
Do what you will, dishonour shall be humour.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And straight is cold again.

CASSIUS.
Hath Cassius liv’d
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
When grief and blood ill-temper’d vexeth him?

BRUTUS.
When I spoke that, I was ill-temper’d too.

CASSIUS.
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

BRUTUS.
And my heart too.

CASSIUS.
O Brutus!

BRUTUS.
What’s the matter?

CASSIUS.
Have not you love enough to bear with me,
When that rash humour which my mother gave me
Makes me forgetful?

BRUTUS.
Yes, Cassius; and from henceforth,
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He’ll think your mother chides, and leave you so.

Enter Poet, followed by Lucilius, Titinius and Lucius.

POET.
[_Within._] Let me go in to see the generals,
There is some grudge between ’em; ’tis not meet
They be alone.

LUCILIUS.
[_Within._] You shall not come to them.

POET.
[_Within._] Nothing but death shall stay me.

CASSIUS.
How now! What’s the matter?

POET.
For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;
For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.

CASSIUS.
Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!

BRUTUS.
Get you hence, sirrah. Saucy fellow, hence!

CASSIUS.
Bear with him, Brutus; ’tis his fashion.

BRUTUS.
I’ll know his humour when he knows his time.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
Companion, hence!

CASSIUS.
Away, away, be gone!

[_Exit Poet._]

BRUTUS.
Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.

CASSIUS.
And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
Immediately to us.

[_Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius._]

BRUTUS.
Lucius, a bowl of wine.

[_Exit Lucius._]

CASSIUS.
I did not think you could have been so angry.

BRUTUS.
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.

CASSIUS.
Of your philosophy you make no use,
If you give place to accidental evils.

BRUTUS.
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.

CASSIUS.
Ha? Portia?

BRUTUS.
She is dead.

CASSIUS.
How ’scap’d I killing, when I cross’d you so?
O insupportable and touching loss!
Upon what sickness?

BRUTUS.
Impatient of my absence,
And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
Have made themselves so strong; for with her death
That tidings came. With this she fell distract,
And, her attendants absent, swallow’d fire.

CASSIUS.
And died so?

BRUTUS.
Even so.

CASSIUS.
O ye immortal gods!

Enter Lucius, with wine and a taper.

BRUTUS.
Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.

[_Drinks._]

CASSIUS.
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o’erswell the cup.
I cannot drink too much of Brutus’ love.

[_Drinks._]

[_Exit Lucius._]

Enter Titinius and Messala.

BRUTUS.
Come in, Titinius!
Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about this taper here,
And call in question our necessities.

CASSIUS.
Portia, art thou gone?

BRUTUS.
No more, I pray you.
Messala, I have here received letters,
That young Octavius and Mark Antony
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition toward Philippi.

MESSALA.
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.

BRUTUS.
With what addition?

MESSALA.
That by proscription and bills of outlawry
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
Have put to death an hundred Senators.

BRUTUS.
Therein our letters do not well agree.
Mine speak of seventy Senators that died
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.

CASSIUS.
Cicero one!

MESSALA.
Cicero is dead,
And by that order of proscription.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?

BRUTUS.
No, Messala.

MESSALA.
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?

BRUTUS.
Nothing, Messala.

MESSALA.
That, methinks, is strange.

BRUTUS.
Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?

MESSALA.
No, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Now as you are a Roman, tell me true.

MESSALA.
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell,
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.

BRUTUS.
Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
With meditating that she must die once,
I have the patience to endure it now.

MESSALA.
Even so great men great losses should endure.

CASSIUS.
I have as much of this in art as you,
But yet my nature could not bear it so.

BRUTUS.
Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Of marching to Philippi presently?

CASSIUS.
I do not think it good.

BRUTUS.
Your reason?

CASSIUS.
This it is:
’Tis better that the enemy seek us;
So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
Doing himself offence, whilst we, lying still,
Are full of rest, defence, and nimbleness.

BRUTUS.
Good reasons must of force give place to better.
The people ’twixt Philippi and this ground
Do stand but in a forced affection;
For they have grudg’d us contribution.
The enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number up,
Come on refresh’d, new-added, and encourag’d;
From which advantage shall we cut him off
If at Philippi we do face him there,
These people at our back.

CASSIUS.
Hear me, good brother.

BRUTUS.
Under your pardon. You must note besides,
That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe.
The enemy increaseth every day;
We, at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.

CASSIUS.
Then, with your will, go on:
We’ll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi.

BRUTUS.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
And nature must obey necessity,
Which we will niggard with a little rest.
There is no more to say?

CASSIUS.
No more. Good night:
Early tomorrow will we rise, and hence.

Enter Lucius.

BRUTUS.
Lucius! My gown.

[_Exit Lucius._]

Farewell now, good Messala.
Good night, Titinius. Noble, noble Cassius,
Good night, and good repose.

CASSIUS.
O my dear brother!
This was an ill beginning of the night.
Never come such division ’tween our souls!
Let it not, Brutus.

Enter Lucius with the gown.

BRUTUS.
Everything is well.

CASSIUS.
Good night, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Good night, good brother.

TITINIUS and MESSALA.
Good night, Lord Brutus.

BRUTUS.
Farewell, everyone.

[_Exeunt Cassius, Titinius and Messala._]

Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?

LUCIUS.
Here in the tent.

BRUTUS.
What, thou speak’st drowsily?
Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o’er-watch’d.
Call Claudius and some other of my men;
I’ll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.

LUCIUS.
Varro and Claudius!

Enter Varro and Claudius.

VARRO.
Calls my lord?

BRUTUS.
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
It may be I shall raise you by-and-by
On business to my brother Cassius.

VARRO.
So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.

BRUTUS.
I will not have it so; lie down, good sirs,
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
Look, Lucius, here’s the book I sought for so;
I put it in the pocket of my gown.

[_Servants lie down._]

LUCIUS.
I was sure your lordship did not give it me.

BRUTUS.
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
And touch thy instrument a strain or two?

LUCIUS.
Ay, my lord, an’t please you.

BRUTUS.
It does, my boy.
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.

LUCIUS.
It is my duty, sir.

BRUTUS.
I should not urge thy duty past thy might;
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.

LUCIUS.
I have slept, my lord, already.

BRUTUS.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
I will be good to thee.

[_Lucius plays and sings till he falls asleep._]

This is a sleepy tune. O murd’rous slumber,
Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,
That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night;
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
If thou dost nod, thou break’st thy instrument;
I’ll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn’d down
Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.

Enter the Ghost of Caesar.

How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here?
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous apparition.
It comes upon me. Art thou anything?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
That mak’st my blood cold and my hair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.

GHOST.
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.

BRUTUS.
Why com’st thou?

GHOST.
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.

BRUTUS.
Well; then I shall see thee again?

GHOST.
Ay, at Philippi.

BRUTUS.
Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.

[_Ghost vanishes._]

Now I have taken heart, thou vanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
Boy! Lucius! Varro! Claudius! Sirs, awake! Claudius!

LUCIUS.
The strings, my lord, are false.

BRUTUS.
He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Lucius, awake!

LUCIUS.
My lord?

BRUTUS.
Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?

LUCIUS.
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.

BRUTUS.
Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?

LUCIUS.
Nothing, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudius!
Fellow thou, awake!

VARRO.
My lord?

CLAUDIUS.
My lord?

BRUTUS.
Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?

VARRO. CLAUDIUS.
Did we, my lord?

BRUTUS.
Ay. Saw you anything?

VARRO.
No, my lord, I saw nothing.

CLAUDIUS.
Nor I, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
And we will follow.

VARRO. CLAUDIUS.
It shall be done, my lord.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The plains of Philippi.


Enter Octavius, Antony and their Army.

OCTAVIUS.
Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
You said the enemy would not come down,
But keep the hills and upper regions.
It proves not so; their battles are at hand,
They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
Answering before we do demand of them.

ANTONY.
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
Wherefore they do it. They could be content
To visit other places, and come down
With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
But ’tis not so.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Prepare you, generals.
The enemy comes on in gallant show;
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
And something to be done immediately.

ANTONY.
Octavius, lead your battle softly on
Upon the left hand of the even field.

OCTAVIUS.
Upon the right hand I. Keep thou the left.

ANTONY.
Why do you cross me in this exigent?

OCTAVIUS.
I do not cross you; but I will do so.

[_March._]

Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius and their Army; Lucilius, Titinius, Messala
and others.

BRUTUS.
They stand, and would have parley.

CASSIUS.
Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.

OCTAVIUS.
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?

ANTONY.
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Make forth; the generals would have some words.

OCTAVIUS.
Stir not until the signal.

BRUTUS.
Words before blows: is it so, countrymen?

OCTAVIUS.
Not that we love words better, as you do.

BRUTUS.
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.

ANTONY.
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words;
Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart,
Crying, “Long live! Hail, Caesar!”

CASSIUS.
Antony,
The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
And leave them honeyless.

ANTONY.
Not stingless too.

BRUTUS.
O yes, and soundless too,
For you have stol’n their buzzing, Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting.

ANTONY.
Villains, you did not so when your vile daggers
Hack’d one another in the sides of Caesar:
You show’d your teeth like apes, and fawn’d like hounds,
And bow’d like bondmen, kissing Caesar’s feet;
Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!

CASSIUS.
Flatterers! Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
This tongue had not offended so today,
If Cassius might have rul’d.

OCTAVIUS.
Come, come, the cause. If arguing makes us sweat,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
Look, I draw a sword against conspirators.
When think you that the sword goes up again?
Never, till Caesar’s three and thirty wounds
Be well aveng’d; or till another Caesar
Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.

BRUTUS.
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors’ hands,
Unless thou bring’st them with thee.

OCTAVIUS.
So I hope.
I was not born to die on Brutus’ sword.

BRUTUS.
O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable.

CASSIUS.
A peevish school-boy, worthless of such honour,
Join’d with a masker and a reveller.

ANTONY.
Old Cassius still!

OCTAVIUS.
Come, Antony; away!
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight today, come to the field;
If not, when you have stomachs.

[_Exeunt Octavius, Antony and their Army._]

CASSIUS.
Why now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark!
The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.

BRUTUS.
Ho, Lucilius! Hark, a word with you.

LUCILIUS.
My lord?

[_Brutus and Lucilius talk apart._]

CASSIUS.
Messala.

MESSALA.
What says my General?

CASSIUS.
Messala,
This is my birth-day; as this very day
Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala:
Be thou my witness that against my will
As Pompey was, am I compell’d to set
Upon one battle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurus strong,
And his opinion. Now I change my mind,
And partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch’d,
Gorging and feeding from our soldiers’ hands,
Who to Philippi here consorted us.
This morning are they fled away and gone,
And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
Fly o’er our heads, and downward look on us,
As we were sickly prey: their shadows seem
A canopy most fatal, under which
Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.

MESSALA.
Believe not so.

CASSIUS.
I but believe it partly,
For I am fresh of spirit, and resolv’d
To meet all perils very constantly.

BRUTUS.
Even so, Lucilius.

CASSIUS.
Now, most noble Brutus,
The gods today stand friendly, that we may,
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
Let’s reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this battle, then is this
The very last time we shall speak together:
What are you then determined to do?

BRUTUS.
Even by the rule of that philosophy
By which I did blame Cato for the death
Which he did give himself, I know not how,
But I do find it cowardly and vile,
For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
The time of life, arming myself with patience
To stay the providence of some high powers
That govern us below.

CASSIUS.
Then, if we lose this battle,
You are contented to be led in triumph
Thorough the streets of Rome?

BRUTUS.
No, Cassius, no: think not, thou noble Roman,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
Must end that work the Ides of March begun;
And whether we shall meet again I know not.
Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
For ever, and for ever, farewell, Cassius.
If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.

CASSIUS.
For ever and for ever farewell, Brutus.
If we do meet again, we’ll smile indeed;
If not, ’tis true this parting was well made.

BRUTUS.
Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
The end of this day’s business ere it come!
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
And then the end is known. Come, ho! away!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same. The field of battle.

Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.

BRUTUS.
Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
Unto the legions on the other side.

[_Loud alarum._]

Let them set on at once; for I perceive
But cold demeanor in Octavius’ wing,
And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala; let them all come down.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter Cassius and Titinius.

CASSIUS.
O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
Myself have to mine own turn’d enemy:
This ensign here of mine was turning back;
I slew the coward, and did take it from him.

TITINIUS.
O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
Took it too eagerly: his soldiers fell to spoil,
Whilst we by Antony are all enclos’d.

Enter Pindarus.

PINDARUS.
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord.
Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.

CASSIUS.
This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius;
Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?

TITINIUS.
They are, my lord.

CASSIUS.
Titinius, if thou lovest me,
Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
And here again, that I may rest assur’d
Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.

TITINIUS.
I will be here again, even with a thought.

[_Exit._]

CASSIUS.
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill,
My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius,
And tell me what thou notest about the field.

[_Pindarus goes up._]

This day I breathed first. Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there shall I end.
My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?

PINDARUS.
[_Above._] O my lord!

CASSIUS.
What news?

PINDARUS.
[_Above._] Titinius is enclosed round about
With horsemen, that make to him on the spur,
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
He’s ta’en!

[_Shout._]

And, hark! they shout for joy.

CASSIUS.
Come down; behold no more.
O, coward that I am, to live so long,
To see my best friend ta’en before my face!

[_Pindarus descends._]

Come hither, sirrah.
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner;
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath.
Now be a freeman; and with this good sword,
That ran through Caesar’s bowels, search this bosom.
Stand not to answer. Here, take thou the hilts;
And when my face is cover’d, as ’tis now,
Guide thou the sword.—Caesar, thou art reveng’d,
Even with the sword that kill’d thee.

[_Dies._]

PINDARUS.
So, I am free, yet would not so have been,
Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
Where never Roman shall take note of him.

[_Exit._]

Enter Titinius with Messala.

MESSALA.
It is but change, Titinius; for Octavius
Is overthrown by noble Brutus’ power,
As Cassius’ legions are by Antony.

TITINIUS.
These tidings would well comfort Cassius.

MESSALA.
Where did you leave him?

TITINIUS.
All disconsolate,
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.

MESSALA.
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?

TITINIUS.
He lies not like the living. O my heart!

MESSALA.
Is not that he?

TITINIUS.
No, this was he, Messala,
But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
So in his red blood Cassius’ day is set.
The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone;
Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done.
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.

MESSALA.
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
O hateful Error, Melancholy’s child!
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not? O Error, soon conceiv’d,
Thou never com’st unto a happy birth,
But kill’st the mother that engender’d thee!

TITINIUS.
What, Pindarus! where art thou, Pindarus?

MESSALA.
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his ears. I may say thrusting it;
For piercing steel and darts envenomed
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
As tidings of this sight.

TITINIUS.
Hie you, Messala,
And I will seek for Pindarus the while.

[_Exit Messala._]

Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!
But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
By your leave, gods. This is a Roman’s part.
Come, Cassius’ sword, and find Titinius’ heart.

[_Dies._]

Alarum. Enter Brutus, Messala, young Cato, Strato, Volumnius and
Lucilius.

BRUTUS.
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?

MESSALA.
Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.

BRUTUS.
Titinius’ face is upward.

CATO.
He is slain.

BRUTUS.
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails.

[_Low alarums._]

CATO.
Brave Titinius!
Look whether he have not crown’d dead Cassius!

BRUTUS.
Are yet two Romans living such as these?
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
It is impossible that ever Rome
Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe more tears
To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
Come therefore, and to Thassos send his body.
His funerals shall not be in our camp,
Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come;
And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on.
’Tis three o’clock; and Romans, yet ere night
We shall try fortune in a second fight.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter fighting soldiers of both armies; then Brutus, Messala,
young Cato, Lucilius, Flavius and others.

BRUTUS.
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!

CATO.
What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
I will proclaim my name about the field.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
A foe to tyrants, and my country’s friend.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!

[_Charges the enemy._]

LUCILIUS.
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;
Brutus, my country’s friend; know me for Brutus!

[_Exit, charging the enemy. Cato is overpowered, and falls._]

LUCILIUS.
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
And mayst be honour’d, being Cato’s son.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Yield, or thou diest.

LUCILIUS.
Only I yield to die:
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight;

[_Offering money_]

Kill Brutus, and be honour’d in his death.

FIRST SOLDIER.
We must not. A noble prisoner!

SECOND SOLDIER.
Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta’en.

FIRST SOLDIER.
I’ll tell the news. Here comes the General.

Enter Antony.

Brutus is ta’en, Brutus is ta’en, my lord.

ANTONY.
Where is he?

LUCILIUS.
Safe, Antony; Brutus is safe enough.
I dare assure thee that no enemy
Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus.
The gods defend him from so great a shame!
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.

ANTONY.
This is not Brutus, friend; but, I assure you,
A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe,
Give him all kindness. I had rather have
Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
And see whether Brutus be alive or dead;
And bring us word unto Octavius’ tent
How everything is chanc’d.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the field.

Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato and Volumnius.

BRUTUS.
Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.

CLITUS.
Statilius show’d the torch-light; but, my lord,
He came not back: he is or ta’en or slain.

BRUTUS.
Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word;
It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.

[_Whispering._]

CLITUS.
What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.

BRUTUS.
Peace then, no words.

CLITUS.
I’ll rather kill myself.

BRUTUS.
Hark thee, Dardanius.

[_Whispers him._]

DARDANIUS.
Shall I do such a deed?

CLITUS.
O Dardanius!

DARDANIUS.
O Clitus!

CLITUS.
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?

DARDANIUS.
To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.

CLITUS.
Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
That it runs over even at his eyes.

BRUTUS.
Come hither, good Volumnius; list a word.

VOLUMNIUS.
What says my lord?

BRUTUS.
Why, this, Volumnius:
The ghost of Caesar hath appear’d to me
Two several times by night; at Sardis once,
And this last night here in Philippi fields.
I know my hour is come.

VOLUMNIUS.
Not so, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Nay I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
Our enemies have beat us to the pit.

[_Low alarums._]

It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
Thou know’st that we two went to school together;
Even for that our love of old, I pr’ythee
Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.

VOLUMNIUS.
That’s not an office for a friend, my lord.

[_Alarums still._]

CLITUS.
Fly, fly, my lord! there is no tarrying here.

BRUTUS.
Farewell to you; and you; and you, Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
Farewell to thee too, Strato.—Countrymen,
My heart doth joy, that yet in all my life
I found no man but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by this losing day
More than Octavius and Mark Antony
By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
So fare you well at once; for Brutus’ tongue
Hath almost ended his life’s history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest,
That have but labour’d to attain this hour.

[_Alarums. Cry within, “Fly, fly, fly!”._]

CLITUS.
Fly, my lord, fly!

BRUTUS.
Hence! I will follow.

[_Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius and Volumnius._]

I pr’ythee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it.
Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?

STRATO.
Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.

BRUTUS.
Farewell, good Strato.—Caesar, now be still:
I kill’d not thee with half so good a will.

[_He runs on his sword, and dies._]

Alarum. Retreat. Enter Antony, Octavius, Messala, Lucilius and the
Army.

OCTAVIUS.
What man is that?

MESSALA.
My master’s man. Strato, where is thy master?

STRATO.
Free from the bondage you are in, Messala.
The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
For Brutus only overcame himself,
And no man else hath honour by his death.

LUCILIUS.
So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
That thou hast prov’d Lucilius’ saying true.

OCTAVIUS.
All that serv’d Brutus, I will entertain them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?

STRATO.
Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.

OCTAVIUS.
Do so, good Messala.

MESSALA.
How died my master, Strato?

STRATO.
I held the sword, and he did run on it.

MESSALA.
Octavius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the latest service to my master.

ANTONY.
This was the noblest Roman of them all.
All the conspirators save only he,
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
He only, in a general honest thought
And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the elements
So mix’d in him that Nature might stand up
And say to all the world, “This was a man!”

OCTAVIUS.
According to his virtue let us use him
With all respect and rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
Most like a soldier, order’d honourably.
So call the field to rest, and let’s away,
To part the glories of this happy day.

[_Exeunt._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AS YOU LIKE IT ***




cover 




AS YOU LIKE IT

by William Shakespeare




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. An Orchard near Oliver’s house
 Scene II. A Lawn before the Duke’s Palace
 Scene III. A Room in the Palace

 ACT II
 Scene I. The Forest of Arden
 Scene II. A Room in the Palace
 Scene III. Before Oliver’s House
 Scene IV. The Forest of Arden
 Scene V. Another part of the Forest
 Scene VI. Another part of the Forest
 Scene VII. Another part of the Forest

 ACT III
 Scene I. A Room in the Palace
 Scene II. The Forest of Arden
 Scene III. Another part of the Forest
 Scene IV. Another part of the Forest. Before a Cottage
 Scene V. Another part of the Forest

 ACT IV
 Scene I. The Forest of Arden
 Scene II. Another part of the Forest
 Scene III. Another part of the Forest

 ACT V
 Scene I. The Forest of Arden
 Scene II. Another part of the Forest
 Scene III. Another part of the Forest
 Scene IV. Another part of the Forest
 Epilogue


Dramatis Personæ

ORLANDO, youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys
OLIVER, eldest son of Sir Rowland de Boys
JAQUES DE BOYS, second son of Sir Rowland de Boys
ADAM, Servant to Oliver
DENNIS, Servant to Oliver

ROSALIND, Daughter of Duke Senior
CELIA, Daughter of Duke Frederick
TOUCHSTONE, a Clown

DUKE SENIOR (Ferdinand), living in exile

JAQUES, Lord attending on the Duke Senior
AMIENS, Lord attending on the Duke Senior

DUKE FREDERICK, Brother to the Duke, and Usurper of his Dominions
CHARLES, his Wrestler
LE BEAU, a Courtier attending upon Frederick

CORIN, Shepherd
SILVIUS, Shepherd
PHOEBE, a Shepherdess
AUDREY, a Country Wench
WILLIAM, a Country Fellow, in love with Audrey
SIR OLIVER MARTEXT, a Vicar

A person representing HYMEN

Lords belonging to the two Dukes; Pages, Foresters, and other
Attendants.

The scene lies first near Oliver’s house; afterwards partly in the
Usurper’s court and partly in the Forest of Arden.




ACT I

SCENE I. An Orchard near Oliver’s house


Enter Orlando and Adam.

ORLANDO.
As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but
poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou sayst, charged my brother, on his
blessing, to breed me well; and there begins my sadness. My brother
Jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit.
For my part, he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you that keeping, for
a gentleman of my birth, that differs not from the stalling of an ox?
His horses are bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their
feeding, they are taught their manage and to that end riders dearly
hired; but I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the
which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I.
Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something
that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from me. He lets me
feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in
him lies, mines my gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that
grieves me, and the spirit of my father, which I think is within me,
begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no longer endure it,
though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoid it.

Enter Oliver.

ADAM.
Yonder comes my master, your brother.

ORLANDO.
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.

[_Adam retires._]

OLIVER.
Now, sir, what make you here?

ORLANDO.
Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.

OLIVER.
What mar you then, sir?

ORLANDO.
Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor
unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.

OLIVER.
Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.

ORLANDO.
Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? What prodigal portion
have I spent that I should come to such penury?

OLIVER.
Know you where you are, sir?

ORLANDO.
O, sir, very well: here in your orchard.

OLIVER.
Know you before whom, sir?

ORLANDO.
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know you are my eldest
brother, and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me.
The courtesy of nations allows you my better in that you are the
first-born, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there
twenty brothers betwixt us. I have as much of my father in me as you,
albeit I confess your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.

OLIVER.
What, boy!

ORLANDO.
Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.

OLIVER.
Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?

ORLANDO.
I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys; he was
my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot
villains. Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy
throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so. Thou
has railed on thyself.

ADAM.
[_Coming forward_.] Sweet masters, be patient. For your father’s
remembrance, be at accord.

OLIVER.
Let me go, I say.

ORLANDO.
I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My father charged you in
his will to give me good education. You have trained me like a peasant,
obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities. The spirit
of my father grows strong in me, and I will no longer endure it.
Therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me
the poor allottery my father left me by testament; with that I will go
buy my fortunes.

OLIVER.
And what wilt thou do? Beg when that is spent? Well, sir, get you in. I
will not long be troubled with you. You shall have some part of your
will. I pray you leave me.

ORLANDO.
I no further offend you than becomes me for my good.

OLIVER.
Get you with him, you old dog.

ADAM.
Is “old dog” my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth in your
service. God be with my old master. He would not have spoke such a
word.

[_Exeunt Orlando and Adam._]

OLIVER.
Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I will physic your rankness,
and yet give no thousand crowns neither. Holla, Dennis!

Enter Dennis.

DENNIS
Calls your worship?

OLIVER.
Was not Charles, the Duke’s wrestler, here to speak with me?

DENNIS
So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access to you.

OLIVER.
Call him in.

[_Exit Dennis._]

’Twill be a good way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.

Enter Charles.

CHARLES.
Good morrow to your worship.

OLIVER.
Good Monsieur Charles. What’s the new news at the new court?

CHARLES.
There’s no news at the court, sir, but the old news. That is, the old
Duke is banished by his younger brother the new Duke, and three or four
loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose
lands and revenues enrich the new Duke; therefore he gives them good
leave to wander.

OLIVER.
Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke’s daughter, be banished with her
father?

CHARLES.
O, no; for the Duke’s daughter, her cousin, so loves her, being ever
from their cradles bred together, that she would have followed her
exile or have died to stay behind her. She is at the court and no less
beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and never two ladies loved
as they do.

OLIVER.
Where will the old Duke live?

CHARLES.
They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many merry men
with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England. They
say many young gentlemen flock to him every day and fleet the time
carelessly, as they did in the golden world.

OLIVER.
What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new Duke?

CHARLES.
Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you with a matter. I am given,
sir, secretly to understand that your younger brother Orlando hath a
disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall. Tomorrow,
sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some
broken limb shall acquit him well. Your brother is but young and
tender, and for your love I would be loath to foil him, as I must for
my own honour if he come in. Therefore, out of my love to you, I came
hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his
intendment, or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that
it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will.

OLIVER.
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will
most kindly requite. I had myself notice of my brother’s purpose
herein, and have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from it;
but he is resolute. I’ll tell thee, Charles, it is the stubbornest
young fellow of France, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every
man’s good parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me his
natural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I had as lief thou didst
break his neck as his finger. And thou wert best look to’t; for if thou
dost him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace himself on
thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap thee by some
treacherous device, and never leave thee till he hath ta’en thy life by
some indirect means or other. For I assure thee (and almost with tears
I speak it) there is not one so young and so villainous this day
living. I speak but brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I must blush and weep, and thou must look pale and
wonder.

CHARLES.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come tomorrow I’ll give
him his payment. If ever he go alone again I’ll never wrestle for prize
more. And so, God keep your worship.

[_Exit._]

OLIVER.
Farewell, good Charles. Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall
see an end of him; for my soul—yet I know not why—hates nothing more
than he. Yet he’s gentle, never schooled and yet learned, full of noble
device, of all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the
heart of the world, and especially of my own people, who best know him,
that I am altogether misprized. But it shall not be so long; this
wrestler shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the boy
thither, which now I’ll go about.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. A Lawn before the Duke’s Palace

Enter Rosalind and Celia.

CELIA.
I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.

ROSALIND.
Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of, and would you yet
I were merrier? Unless you could teach me to forget a banished father,
you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.

CELIA.
Herein I see thou lov’st me not with the full weight that I love thee.
If my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy uncle, the Duke my
father, so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught my love
to take thy father for mine. So wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love
to me were so righteously tempered as mine is to thee.

ROSALIND.
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice in yours.

CELIA.
You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to have; and
truly, when he dies thou shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away
from thy father perforce, I will render thee again in affection. By
mine honour I will! And when I break that oath, let me turn monster.
Therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.

ROSALIND.
From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let me see—what think
you of falling in love?

CELIA.
Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal; but love no man in good
earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety of a pure
blush thou mayst in honour come off again.

ROSALIND.
What shall be our sport, then?

CELIA.
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her wheel, that her
gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.

ROSALIND.
I would we could do so, for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and
the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.

CELIA.
’Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest, and
those that she makes honest she makes very ill-favouredly.

ROSALIND.
Nay, now thou goest from Fortune’s office to Nature’s. Fortune reigns
in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature.

Enter Touchstone.

CELIA.
No? When Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by Fortune fall
into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune,
hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?

ROSALIND.
Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when Fortune makes
Nature’s natural the cutter-off of Nature’s wit.

CELIA.
Peradventure this is not Fortune’s work neither, but Nature’s, who
perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, and
hath sent this natural for our whetstone; for always the dullness of
the fool is the whetstone of the wits.—How now, wit, whither wander
you?

TOUCHSTONE.
Mistress, you must come away to your father.

CELIA.
Were you made the messenger?

TOUCHSTONE.
No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.

ROSALIND.
Where learned you that oath, fool?

TOUCHSTONE.
Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were good pancakes,
and swore by his honour the mustard was naught. Now, I’ll stand to it,
the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and yet was not the
knight forsworn.

CELIA.
How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?

ROSALIND.
Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.

TOUCHSTONE.
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear by your beards
that I am a knave.

CELIA.
By our beards, if we had them, thou art.

TOUCHSTONE.
By my knavery, if I had it, then I were. But if you swear by that that
is not, you are not forsworn. No more was this knight swearing by his
honour, for he never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away before
ever he saw those pancackes or that mustard.

CELIA.
Prithee, who is’t that thou mean’st?

TOUCHSTONE.
One that old Frederick, your father, loves.

CELIA.
My father’s love is enough to honour him. Enough! Speak no more of him.
You’ll be whipped for taxation one of these days.

TOUCHSTONE.
The more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do
foolishly.

CELIA.
By my troth, thou sayest true. For since the little wit that fools have
was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show.
Here comes Monsieur Le Beau.

Enter Le Beau.

ROSALIND.
With his mouth full of news.

CELIA.
Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.

ROSALIND.
Then shall we be news-crammed.

CELIA.
All the better; we shall be the more marketable.
_Bonjour_, Monsieur Le Beau. What’s the news?

LE BEAU.
Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.

CELIA.
Sport! Of what colour?

LE BEAU.
What colour, madam? How shall I answer you?

ROSALIND.
As wit and fortune will.

TOUCHSTONE.
Or as the destinies decrees.

CELIA.
Well said. That was laid on with a trowel.

TOUCHSTONE.
Nay, if I keep not my rank—

ROSALIND.
Thou losest thy old smell.

LE BEAU.
You amaze me, ladies. I would have told you of good wrestling, which
you have lost the sight of.

ROSALIND.
Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.

LE BEAU.
I will tell you the beginning and, if it please your ladyships, you may
see the end, for the best is yet to do; and here, where you are, they
are coming to perform it.

CELIA.
Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.

LE BEAU.
There comes an old man and his three sons—

CELIA.
I could match this beginning with an old tale.

LE BEAU.
Three proper young men of excellent growth and presence.

ROSALIND.
With bills on their necks: “Be it known unto all men by these
presents.”

LE BEAU.
The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the Duke’s wrestler,
which Charles in a moment threw him and broke three of his ribs, that
there is little hope of life in him. So he served the second, and so
the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man their father making such
pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with
weeping.

ROSALIND.
Alas!

TOUCHSTONE.
But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost?

LE BEAU.
Why, this that I speak of.

TOUCHSTONE.
Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time that ever I
heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.

CELIA.
Or I, I promise thee.

ROSALIND.
But is there any else longs to see this broken music in his sides? Is
there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling,
cousin?

LE BEAU.
You must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the
wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.

CELIA.
Yonder, sure, they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.

Flourish. Enter Duke Frederick, Lords, Orlando, Charles and Attendants.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Come on. Since the youth will not be entreated, his own peril on his
forwardness.

ROSALIND.
Is yonder the man?

LE BEAU.
Even he, madam.

CELIA.
Alas, he is too young. Yet he looks successfully.

DUKE FREDERICK.
How now, daughter and cousin? Are you crept hither to see the
wrestling?

ROSALIND.
Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.

DUKE FREDERICK.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you, there is such odds
in the man. In pity of the challenger’s youth I would fain dissuade
him, but he will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if you can
move him.

CELIA.
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Do so; I’ll not be by.

[_Duke Frederick steps aside._]

LE BEAU.
Monsieur the challenger, the Princess calls for you.

ORLANDO.
I attend them with all respect and duty.

ROSALIND.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?

ORLANDO.
No, fair princess. He is the general challenger. I come but in as
others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.

CELIA.
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years. You have
seen cruel proof of this man’s strength. If you saw yourself with your
eyes or knew yourself with your judgement, the fear of your adventure
would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. We pray you for your own
sake to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.

ROSALIND.
Do, young sir. Your reputation shall not therefore be misprized. We
will make it our suit to the Duke that the wrestling might not go
forward.

ORLANDO.
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein I confess
me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let
your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial, wherein if I
be foiled there is but one shamed that was never gracious; if killed,
but one dead that is willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong,
for I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have
nothing. Only in the world I fill up a place, which may be better
supplied when I have made it empty.

ROSALIND.
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.

CELIA.
And mine to eke out hers.

ROSALIND.
Fare you well. Pray heaven I be deceived in you.

CELIA.
Your heart’s desires be with you.

CHARLES.
Come, where is this young gallant that is so desirous to lie with his
mother earth?

ORLANDO.
Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.

DUKE FREDERICK.
You shall try but one fall.

CHARLES.
No, I warrant your grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that
have so mightily persuaded him from a first.

ORLANDO.
You mean to mock me after; you should not have mocked me before. But
come your ways.

ROSALIND.
Now, Hercules be thy speed, young man!

CELIA.
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.

[_Orlando and Charles wrestle._]

ROSALIND.
O excellent young man!

CELIA.
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.

[_Charles is thrown. Shout._]

DUKE FREDERICK.
No more, no more.

ORLANDO.
Yes, I beseech your grace. I am not yet well breathed.

DUKE FREDERICK.
How dost thou, Charles?

LE BEAU.
He cannot speak, my lord.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Bear him away.

[_Charles is carried off by Attendants._]

What is thy name, young man?

ORLANDO.
Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.

DUKE FREDERICK.
I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
The world esteemed thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told me of another father.

[_Exeunt Duke Frederick, Le Beau and Lords._]

CELIA.
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?

ORLANDO.
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland’s son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.

ROSALIND.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father’s mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties
Ere he should thus have ventured.

CELIA.
Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him and encourage him.
My father’s rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart.—Sir, you have well deserved.
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.

ROSALIND.
Gentleman,

[_Giving him a chain from her neck_.]

Wear this for me—one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more but that her hand lacks means.—
Shall we go, coz?

CELIA.
Ay.—Fare you well, fair gentleman.

ORLANDO.
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

ROSALIND.
He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes.
I’ll ask him what he would.—Did you call, sir?—
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your enemies.

CELIA.
Will you go, coz?

ROSALIND.
Have with you.—Fare you well.

[_Exeunt Rosalind and Celia._]

ORLANDO.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown.
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

Enter Le Beau.

LE BEAU.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
Yet such is now the Duke’s condition
That he misconsters all that you have done.
The Duke is humorous; what he is indeed
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.

ORLANDO.
I thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke
That here was at the wrestling?

LE BEAU.
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished Duke,
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this Duke
Hath ta’en displeasure ’gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father’s sake;
And, on my life, his malice ’gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

ORLANDO.
I rest much bounden to you; fare you well!

[_Exit Le Beau._]

Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant Duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Room in the Palace

Enter Celia and Rosalind.

CELIA.
Why, cousin, why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! Not a word?

ROSALIND.
Not one to throw at a dog.

CELIA.
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs. Throw some of
them at me. Come, lame me with reasons.

ROSALIND.
Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with
reasons and the other mad without any.

CELIA.
But is all this for your father?

ROSALIND.
No, some of it is for my child’s father. O, how full of briers is this
working-day world!

CELIA.
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery. If we
walk not in the trodden paths, our very petticoats will catch them.

ROSALIND.
I could shake them off my coat; these burs are in my heart.

CELIA.
Hem them away.

ROSALIND.
I would try, if I could cry “hem” and have him.

CELIA.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.

ROSALIND.
O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.

CELIA.
O, a good wish upon you! You will try in time, in despite of a fall.
But turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest. Is
it possible on such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland’s youngest son?

ROSALIND.
The Duke my father loved his father dearly.

CELIA.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? By this
kind of chase I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly;
yet I hate not Orlando.

ROSALIND.
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.

CELIA.
Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.

ROSALIND.
Let me love him for that, and do you love him because I do.—Look, here
comes the Duke.

CELIA.
With his eyes full of anger.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court.

ROSALIND.
Me, uncle?

DUKE FREDERICK.
You, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou be’st found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.

ROSALIND.
I do beseech your Grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream, or be not frantic—
As I do trust I am not—then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your Highness.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.

ROSALIND.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Thou art thy father’s daughter, there’s enough.

ROSALIND.
So was I when your highness took his dukedom;
So was I when your highness banished him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
What’s that to me? My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.

CELIA.
Dear sovereign, hear me speak.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake,
Else had she with her father ranged along.

CELIA.
I did not then entreat to have her stay;
It was your pleasure and your own remorse.
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, ate together,
And wheresoe’er we went, like Juno’s swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.

DUKE FREDERICK.
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Her very silence, and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.

CELIA.
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of her company.

DUKE FREDERICK.
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour
And in the greatness of my word, you die.

[_Exeunt Duke Frederick and Lords._]

CELIA.
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

ROSALIND.
I have more cause.

CELIA.
Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee be cheerful. Know’st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter?

ROSALIND.
That he hath not.

CELIA.
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I’ll go along with thee.

ROSALIND.
Why, whither shall we go?

CELIA.
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.

ROSALIND.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

CELIA.
I’ll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you; so shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.

ROSALIND.
Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtal-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman’s fear there will,
We’ll have a swashing and a martial outside,
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.

CELIA.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?

ROSALIND.
I’ll have no worse a name than Jove’s own page,
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be called?

CELIA.
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.

ROSALIND.
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father’s court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?

CELIA.
He’ll go along o’er the wide world with me.
Leave me alone to woo him. Let’s away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. The Forest of Arden


Enter Duke Senior, Amiens and two or three Lords, dressed as foresters.

DUKE SENIOR.
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons’ difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter’s wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say:
“This is no flattery. These are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am.”
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.

AMIENS.
I would not change it. Happy is your grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

DUKE SENIOR.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.

FIRST LORD.
Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banished you.
Today my lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood;
To the which place a poor sequestered stag,
That from the hunter’s aim had ta’en a hurt,
Did come to languish; and indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on th’ extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.

DUKE SENIOR.
But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?

FIRST LORD.
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
“Poor deer,” quoth he “thou mak’st a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much.” Then, being there alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
“’Tis right”; quoth he, “thus misery doth part
The flux of company.” Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him. “Ay,” quoth Jaques,
“Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens!
’Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?”
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of the country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what’s worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling-place.

DUKE SENIOR.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?

SECOND LORD.
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.

DUKE SENIOR.
Show me the place.
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he’s full of matter.

FIRST LORD.
I’ll bring you to him straight.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Room in the Palace

Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be! Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.

FIRST LORD.
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.

SECOND LORD.
My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
Hesperia, the princess’ gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o’erheard
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;
And she believes wherever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me.
I’ll make him find him. Do this suddenly!
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Before Oliver’s House

Enter Orlando and Adam, meeting.

ORLANDO.
Who’s there?

ADAM.
What, my young master? O my gentle master,
O my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny prizer of the humorous Duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
O, what a world is this, when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it!

ORLANDO.
Why, what’s the matter?

ADAM.
O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors! Within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives.
Your brother—no, no brother, yet the son—
Yet not the son; I will not call him son—
Of him I was about to call his father,
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it. If he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off;
I overheard him and his practices.
This is no place; this house is but a butchery.
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.

ORLANDO.
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?

ADAM.
No matter whither, so you come not here.

ORLANDO.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do.
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.

ADAM.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster-nurse,
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown.
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age. Here is the gold.
All this I give you. Let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty,
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility.
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty but kindly. Let me go with you.
I’ll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.

ORLANDO.
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed.
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having. It is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun’st a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways, we’ll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent
We’ll light upon some settled low content.

ADAM.
Master, go on and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore it is too late a week.
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well and not my master’s debtor.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden

Enter Rosalind as Ganymede, Celia as Aliena, and Touchstone.

ROSALIND.
O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!

TOUCHSTONE.
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.

ROSALIND.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man’s apparel, and to cry like
a woman, but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose
ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. Therefore, courage, good
Aliena.

CELIA.
I pray you bear with me, I cannot go no further.

TOUCHSTONE.
For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you. Yet I should
bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your
purse.

ROSALIND.
Well, this is the forest of Arden.

TOUCHSTONE.
Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I! When I was at home I was in a
better place, but travellers must be content.

Enter Corin and Silvius.

ROSALIND.
Ay, be so, good Touchstone. Look you, who comes here? A young man and
an old in solemn talk.

CORIN.
That is the way to make her scorn you still.

SILVIUS.
O Corin, that thou knew’st how I do love her!

CORIN.
I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.

SILVIUS.
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.
But if thy love were ever like to mine—
As sure I think did never man love so—
How many actions most ridiculous
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?

CORIN.
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.

SILVIUS.
O, thou didst then never love so heartily!
If thou rememb’rest not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress’ praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phoebe, Phoebe, Phoebe!

[_Exit Silvius._]

ROSALIND.
Alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.

TOUCHSTONE.
And I mine. I remember when I was in love I broke my sword upon a stone
and bid him take that for coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I remember
the kissing of her batlet, and the cow’s dugs that her pretty chopped
hands had milked; and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of
her, from whom I took two cods, and, giving her them again, said with
weeping tears, “Wear these for my sake.” We that are true lovers run
into strange capers. But as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature
in love mortal in folly.

ROSALIND.
Thou speak’st wiser than thou art ware of.

TOUCHSTONE.
Nay, I shall ne’er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins
against it.

ROSALIND.
Jove, Jove, this shepherd’s passion
Is much upon my fashion.

TOUCHSTONE.
And mine, but it grows something stale with me.

CELIA.
I pray you, one of you question yond man
If he for gold will give us any food.
I faint almost to death.

TOUCHSTONE.
Holla, you clown!

ROSALIND.
Peace, fool, he’s not thy kinsman.

CORIN.
Who calls?

TOUCHSTONE.
Your betters, sir.

CORIN.
Else are they very wretched.

ROSALIND.
Peace, I say.—Good even to you, friend.

CORIN.
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.

ROSALIND.
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
Here’s a young maid with travel much oppressed,
And faints for succour.

CORIN.
Fair sir, I pity her
And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her.
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you will feed on. But what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.

ROSALIND.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?

CORIN.
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying anything.

ROSALIND.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.

CELIA.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.

CORIN.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
Go with me. If you like upon report
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful feeder be,
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the Forest

Enter Amiens, Jaques and others.

AMIENS.
[_Sings_.]

        Under the greenwood tree,
        Who loves to lie with me
        And turn his merry note
        Unto the sweet bird’s throat,
    Come hither, come hither, come hither!
        Here shall he see
        No enemy
    But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES.
More, more, I prithee, more.

AMIENS.
It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES.
I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy out of a song
as a weasel sucks eggs. More, I prithee, more.

AMIENS.
My voice is ragged. I know I cannot please you.

JAQUES.
I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to sing. Come, more,
another _stanzo_. Call you ’em _stanzos?_

AMIENS.
What you will, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES.
Nay, I care not for their names. They owe me nothing. Will you sing?

AMIENS.
More at your request than to please myself.

JAQUES.
Well then, if ever I thank any man, I’ll thank you; but that they call
compliment is like th’ encounter of two dog-apes. And when a man thanks
me heartily, methinks I have given him a penny and he renders me the
beggarly thanks. Come, sing; and you that will not, hold your tongues.

AMIENS.
Well, I’ll end the song.—Sirs, cover the while. The Duke will drink
under this tree; he hath been all this day to look you.

JAQUES.
And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is too disputable for my
company. I think of as many matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and
make no boast of them. Come, warble, come.

AMIENS.
[_Sings_.]

        Who doth ambition shun
        And loves to live i’ th’ sun,
        Seeking the food he eats
        And pleased with what he gets,
    Come hither, come hither, come hither.
        Here shall he see
        No enemy
    But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES.
I’ll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in despite of
my invention.

AMIENS.
And I’ll sing it.

JAQUES.
Thus it goes:

        If it do come to pass
        That any man turn ass,
        Leaving his wealth and ease
        A stubborn will to please,
    Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame;
        Here shall he see
        Gross fools as he,
    An if he will come to me.

AMIENS.
What’s that “ducdame?”

JAQUES.
’Tis a Greek invocation to call fools into a circle. I’ll go sleep if I
can; if I cannot, I’ll rail against all the first-born of Egypt.

AMIENS.
And I’ll go seek the Duke; his banquet is prepared.

[_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE VI. Another part of the Forest

Enter Orlando and Adam.

ADAM.
Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food! Here lie I down
and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.

ORLANDO.
Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in thee? Live a little, comfort a
little, cheer thyself a little. If this uncouth forest yield anything
savage, I will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee. Thy
conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my sake, be comfortable.
Hold death awhile at the arm’s end. I will here be with thee presently,
and if I bring thee not something to eat, I’ll give thee leave to die.
But if thou diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well
said, thou look’st cheerly, and I’ll be with thee quickly. Yet thou
liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some shelter and thou
shalt not die for lack of a dinner if there live anything in this
desert. Cheerly, good Adam!

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Another part of the Forest

Enter Duke Senior, Amiens and Lords as outlaws.

DUKE SENIOR.
I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can nowhere find him like a man.

FIRST LORD.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence;
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.

DUKE SENIOR.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go seek him, tell him I would speak with him.

Enter Jaques.

FIRST LORD.
He saves my labour by his own approach.

DUKE SENIOR.
Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this
That your poor friends must woo your company?
What, you look merrily.

JAQUES.
A fool, a fool! I met a fool i’ th’ forest,
A motley fool. A miserable world!
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down and basked him in the sun,
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
“Good morrow, fool,” quoth I. “No, sir,” quoth he,
“Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune.”
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
Says very wisely, “It is ten o’clock.
Thus we may see,” quoth he, “how the world wags.
’Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more ’twill be eleven.
And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale.” When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! Motley’s the only wear.

DUKE SENIOR.
What fool is this?

JAQUES.
O worthy fool!—One that hath been a courtier,
And says if ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it. And in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat.

DUKE SENIOR.
Thou shalt have one.

JAQUES.
It is my only suit,
Provided that you weed your better judgements
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have.
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The “why” is plain as way to parish church.
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The wise man’s folly is anatomized
Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley. Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of th’ infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.

DUKE SENIOR.
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.

JAQUES.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?

DUKE SENIOR.
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin;
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
And all th’ embossed sores and headed evils
That thou with license of free foot hast caught
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.

JAQUES.
Why, who cries out on pride
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then. How then, what then? Let me see wherein
My tongue hath wronged him. If it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself. If he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies
Unclaimed of any man. But who comes here?

Enter Orlando with sword drawn.

ORLANDO.
Forbear, and eat no more.

JAQUES.
Why, I have eat none yet.

ORLANDO.
Nor shalt not till necessity be served.

JAQUES.
Of what kind should this cock come of?

DUKE SENIOR.
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress?
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem’st so empty?

ORLANDO.
You touched my vein at first. The thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta’en from me the show
Of smooth civility; yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say!
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.

JAQUES.
An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.

DUKE SENIOR.
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
More than your force move us to gentleness.

ORLANDO.
I almost die for food, and let me have it.

DUKE SENIOR.
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.

ORLANDO.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you.
I thought that all things had been savage here
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate’er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time,
If ever you have looked on better days,
If ever been where bells have knolled to church,
If ever sat at any good man’s feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear,
And know what ’tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.

DUKE SENIOR.
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knolled to church,
And sat at good men’s feasts, and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered.
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.

ORLANDO.
Then but forbear your food a little while,
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn,
And give it food. There is an old poor man
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR.
Go find him out,
And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO.
I thank ye, and be blest for your good comfort.

[_Exit._]

DUKE SENIOR.
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy.
This wide and universal theatre
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in.

JAQUES.
All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms;
Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress’ eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

Enter Orlando bearing Adam.

DUKE SENIOR.
Welcome. Set down your venerable burden,
And let him feed.

ORLANDO.
I thank you most for him.

ADAM.
So had you need;
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR.
Welcome, fall to. I will not trouble you
As yet to question you about your fortunes.
Give us some music, and good cousin, sing.

SONG.


AMIENS. (_Sings_.)
        Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
        Thou art not so unkind
            As man’s ingratitude.
        Thy tooth is not so keen,
        Because thou art not seen,
            Although thy breath be rude.
Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
        Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
            This life is most jolly.

         Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
        That dost not bite so nigh
            As benefits forgot.
        Though thou the waters warp,
        Thy sting is not so sharp
            As friend remembered not.
Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
        Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
            This life is most jolly.

DUKE SENIOR.
If that you were the good Sir Rowland’s son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limned and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither. I am the Duke
That loved your father. The residue of your fortune
Go to my cave and tell me.—Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Support him by the arm. [_To Orlando_.] Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A Room in the Palace


Enter Duke Frederick, Lords and Oliver.

DUKE FREDERICK.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother wheresoe’er he is.
Seek him with candle. Bring him dead or living
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands, and all things that thou dost call thine
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother’s mouth
Of what we think against thee.

OLIVER.
O that your highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.

DUKE FREDERICK.
More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors,
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Forest of Arden

Enter Orlando with a paper.

ORLANDO.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love.
     And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
     Thy huntress’ name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books,
     And in their barks my thoughts I’ll character,
That every eye which in this forest looks
     Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere.
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.

[_Exit._]

Enter Corin and Touchstone.

CORIN.
And how like you this shepherd’s life, Master Touchstone?

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but in
respect that it is a shepherd’s life, it is naught. In respect that it
is solitary, I like it very well; but in respect that it is private, it
is a very vile life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me
well; but in respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. As it is a
spare life, look you, it fits my humour well; but as there is no more
plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in
thee, shepherd?

CORIN.
No more but that I know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is;
and that he that wants money, means, and content is without three good
friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn; that
good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a great cause of the night is
lack of the sun; that he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.

TOUCHSTONE.
Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in court, shepherd?

CORIN.
No, truly.

TOUCHSTONE.
Then thou art damned.

CORIN.
Nay, I hope.

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side.

CORIN.
For not being at court? Your reason.

TOUCHSTONE.
Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never saw’st good manners; if
thou never saw’st good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and
wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art in a parlous state,
shepherd.

CORIN.
Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good manners at the court are as
ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the country is most
mockable at the court. You told me you salute not at the court but you
kiss your hands. That courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were
shepherds.

TOUCHSTONE.
Instance, briefly. Come, instance.

CORIN.
Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their fells, you know, are
greasy.

TOUCHSTONE.
Why, do not your courtier’s hands sweat? And is not the grease of a
mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow. A better
instance, I say. Come.

CORIN.
Besides, our hands are hard.

TOUCHSTONE.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again. A more sounder
instance, come.

CORIN.
And they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep; and would
you have us kiss tar? The courtier’s hands are perfumed with civet.

TOUCHSTONE.
Most shallow man! Thou worm’s meat in respect of a good piece of flesh
indeed! Learn of the wise and perpend. Civet is of a baser birth than
tar, the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.

CORIN.
You have too courtly a wit for me. I’ll rest.

TOUCHSTONE.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man! God make incision in
thee, thou art raw.

CORIN.
Sir, I am a true labourer. I earn that I eat, get that I wear, owe no
man hate, envy no man’s happiness, glad of other men’s good, content
with my harm; and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and
my lambs suck.

TOUCHSTONE.
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes and the rams
together and to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle;
to be bawd to a bell-wether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth
to crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram, out of all reasonable match. If
thou be’st not damned for this, the devil himself will have no
shepherds. I cannot see else how thou shouldst ’scape.

Enter Rosalind as Ganymede.

CORIN.
Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress’s brother.

ROSALIND.
[_Reads_.]
         _From the east to western Inde
         No jewel is like Rosalind.
         Her worth being mounted on the wind,
         Through all the world bears Rosalind.
         All the pictures fairest lined
         Are but black to Rosalind.
         Let no face be kept in mind
         But the fair of Rosalind._

TOUCHSTONE.
I’ll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and suppers and
sleeping hours excepted. It is the right butter-women’s rank to market.

ROSALIND.
Out, fool!

TOUCHSTONE.
         For a taste:
         If a hart do lack a hind,
         Let him seek out Rosalind.
         If the cat will after kind,
         So be sure will Rosalind.
         Winter garments must be lined,
         So must slender Rosalind.
         They that reap must sheaf and bind,
         Then to cart with Rosalind.
         Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
         Such a nut is Rosalind.
         He that sweetest rose will find
         Must find love’s prick, and Rosalind.
This is the very false gallop of verses. Why do you infect yourself
with them?

ROSALIND.
Peace, you dull fool, I found them on a tree.

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

ROSALIND.
I’ll graft it with you, and then I shall graft it with a medlar. Then
it will be the earliest fruit i’ th’ country, for you’ll be rotten ere
you be half ripe, and that’s the right virtue of the medlar.

TOUCHSTONE.
You have said, but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.

Enter Celia as Aliena, reading a paper.

ROSALIND.
Peace, here comes my sister, reading. Stand aside.

CELIA.
[_Reads_.]
            _Why should this a desert be?
                For it is unpeopled? No!
            Tongues I’ll hang on every tree
                That shall civil sayings show.
            Some, how brief the life of man
                Runs his erring pilgrimage,
            That the streching of a span
                Buckles in his sum of age;
            Some, of violated vows
                ’Twixt the souls of friend and friend.
            But upon the fairest boughs,
                Or at every sentence’ end,
            Will I “Rosalinda” write,
                Teaching all that read to know
            The quintessence of every sprite
                Heaven would in little show.
            Therefore heaven nature charged
                That one body should be filled
            With all graces wide-enlarged.
                Nature presently distilled
            Helen’s cheek, but not her heart,
                Cleopatra’s majesty;
            Atalanta’s better part,
                Sad Lucretia’s modesty.
            Thus Rosalind of many parts
                By heavenly synod was devised,
            Of many faces, eyes, and hearts
                To have the touches dearest prized.
            Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
                And I to live and die her slave._

ROSALIND.
O most gentle Jupiter, what tedious homily of love have you wearied
your parishioners withal, and never cried “Have patience, good people!”

CELIA.
How now! Back, friends. Shepherd, go off a little. Go with him, sirrah.

TOUCHSTONE.
Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat, though not with bag
and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.

[_Exeunt Corin and Touchstone._]

CELIA.
Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND.
O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them
more feet than the verses would bear.

CELIA.
That’s no matter. The feet might bear the verses.

ROSALIND.
Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the
verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.

CELIA.
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be hanged and
carved upon these trees?

ROSALIND.
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you came; for
look here what I found on a palm-tree. I was never so berhymed since
Pythagoras’ time that I was an Irish rat, which I can hardly remember.

CELIA.
Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND.
Is it a man?

CELIA.
And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. Change you colour?

ROSALIND.
I prithee, who?

CELIA.
O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but mountains
may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter.

ROSALIND.
Nay, but who is it?

CELIA.
Is it possible?

ROSALIND.
Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.

CELIA.
O wonderful, wonderful, most wonderful wonderful, and yet again
wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!

ROSALIND.
Good my complexion! Dost thou think, though I am caparisoned like a
man, I have a doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of delay
more is a South Sea of discovery. I prithee tell me who is it quickly,
and speak apace. I would thou couldst stammer, that thou mightst pour
this concealed man out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of
narrow-mouthed bottle—either too much at once or none at all. I prithee
take the cork out of thy mouth that I may drink thy tidings.

CELIA.
So you may put a man in your belly.

ROSALIND.
Is he of God’s making? What manner of man? Is his head worth a hat, or
his chin worth a beard?

CELIA.
Nay, he hath but a little beard.

ROSALIND.
Why, God will send more if the man will be thankful. Let me stay the
growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

CELIA.
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler’s heels and your
heart both in an instant.

ROSALIND.
Nay, but the devil take mocking! Speak sad brow and true maid.

CELIA.
I’ faith, coz, ’tis he.

ROSALIND.
Orlando?

CELIA.
Orlando.

ROSALIND.
Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet and hose? What did he
when thou saw’st him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he?
What makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he
with thee? And when shalt thou see him again? Answer me in one word.

CELIA.
You must borrow me Gargantua’s mouth first. ’Tis a word too great for
any mouth of this age’s size. To say ay and no to these particulars is
more than to answer in a catechism.

ROSALIND.
But doth he know that I am in this forest and in man’s apparel? Looks
he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?

CELIA.
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the propositions of a
lover. But take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good
observance. I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.

ROSALIND.
It may well be called Jove’s tree when it drops forth such fruit.

CELIA.
Give me audience, good madam.

ROSALIND.
Proceed.

CELIA.
There lay he, stretched along like a wounded knight.

ROSALIND.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.

CELIA.
Cry “holla!” to thy tongue, I prithee. It curvets unseasonably. He was
furnished like a hunter.

ROSALIND.
O, ominous! He comes to kill my heart.

CELIA.
I would sing my song without a burden. Thou bring’st me out of tune.

ROSALIND.
Do you not know I am a woman? When I think, I must speak. Sweet, say
on.

Enter Orlando and Jaques.

CELIA.
You bring me out. Soft, comes he not here?

ROSALIND.
’Tis he! Slink by, and note him.

[_Rosalind and Celia step aside._]

JAQUES.
I thank you for your company but, good faith, I had as lief have been
myself alone.

ORLANDO.
And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too for your
society.

JAQUES.
God be wi’ you, let’s meet as little as we can.

ORLANDO.
I do desire we may be better strangers.

JAQUES.
I pray you, mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks.

ORLANDO.
I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly.

JAQUES.
Rosalind is your love’s name?

ORLANDO.
Yes, just.

JAQUES.
I do not like her name.

ORLANDO.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.

JAQUES.
What stature is she of?

ORLANDO.
Just as high as my heart.

JAQUES.
You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been acquainted with
goldsmiths’ wives, and conned them out of rings?

ORLANDO.
Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have
studied your questions.

JAQUES.
You have a nimble wit. I think ’twas made of Atalanta’s heels. Will you
sit down with me? And we two will rail against our mistress the world
and all our misery.

ORLANDO.
I will chide no breather in the world but myself, against whom I know
most faults.

JAQUES.
The worst fault you have is to be in love.

ORLANDO.
’Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue. I am weary of you.

JAQUES.
By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found you.

ORLANDO.
He is drowned in the brook. Look but in, and you shall see him.

JAQUES.
There I shall see mine own figure.

ORLANDO.
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

JAQUES.
I’ll tarry no longer with you. Farewell, good Signior Love.

ORLANDO.
I am glad of your departure. Adieu, good Monsieur Melancholy.

[_Exit Jaques.—Celia and Rosalind come forward._]

ROSALIND.
I will speak to him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the
knave with him.
Do you hear, forester?

ORLANDO.
Very well. What would you?

ROSALIND.
I pray you, what is’t o’clock?

ORLANDO.
You should ask me what time o’ day. There’s no clock in the forest.

ROSALIND.
Then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing every minute
and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time as well as a
clock.

ORLANDO.
And why not the swift foot of time? Had not that been as proper?

ROSALIND.
By no means, sir. Time travels in divers paces with divers persons.
I’ll tell you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal, who time
gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.

ORLANDO.
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND.
Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her
marriage and the day it is solemnized. If the interim be but a
se’nnight, time’s pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven
year.

ORLANDO.
Who ambles time withal?

ROSALIND.
With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that hath not the gout;
for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study, and the other lives
merrily because he feels no pain; the one lacking the burden of lean
and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious
penury. These time ambles withal.

ORLANDO.
Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND.
With a thief to the gallows; for though he go as softly as foot can
fall, he thinks himself too soon there.

ORLANDO.
Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND.
With lawyers in the vacation; for they sleep between term and term, and
then they perceive not how time moves.

ORLANDO.
Where dwell you, pretty youth?

ROSALIND.
With this shepherdess, my sister, here in the skirts of the forest,
like fringe upon a petticoat.

ORLANDO.
Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND.
As the coney that you see dwell where she is kindled.

ORLANDO.
Your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a
dwelling.

ROSALIND.
I have been told so of many. But indeed an old religious uncle of mine
taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew
courtship too well, for there he fell in love. I have heard him read
many lectures against it, and I thank God I am not a woman, to be
touched with so many giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their
whole sex withal.

ORLANDO.
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge
of women?

ROSALIND.
There were none principal. They were all like one another as halfpence
are, every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow fault came to
match it.

ORLANDO.
I prithee recount some of them.

ROSALIND.
No. I will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick. There is
a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with carving
“Rosalind” on their barks; hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies on
brambles; all, forsooth, deifying the name of Rosalind. If I could meet
that fancy-monger, I would give him some good counsel, for he seems to
have the quotidian of love upon him.

ORLANDO.
I am he that is so love-shaked. I pray you tell me your remedy.

ROSALIND.
There is none of my uncle’s marks upon you. He taught me how to know a
man in love, in which cage of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.

ORLANDO.
What were his marks?

ROSALIND.
A lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have
not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected,
which you have not—but I pardon you for that, for simply your having in
beard is a younger brother’s revenue. Then your hose should be
ungartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe
untied, and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation.
But you are no such man. You are rather point-device in your
accoutrements, as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.

ORLANDO.
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

ROSALIND.
Me believe it? You may as soon make her that you love believe it, which
I warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does. That is one of
the points in the which women still give the lie to their consciences.
But, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the trees,
wherein Rosalind is so admired?

ORLANDO.
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he,
that unfortunate he.

ROSALIND.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO.
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

ROSALIND.
Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves as well a dark
house and a whip as madmen do; and the reason why they are not so
punished and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers
are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.

ORLANDO.
Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND.
Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me his love, his
mistress, and I set him every day to woo me; at which time would I,
being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing
and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of
tears, full of smiles; for every passion something and for no passion
truly anything, as boys and women are for the most part cattle of this
colour; would now like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then
forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him; that I drave my
suitor from his mad humour of love to a living humour of madness, which
was to forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook
merely monastic. And thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me
to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep’s heart, that there shall
not be one spot of love in ’t.

ORLANDO.
I would not be cured, youth.

ROSALIND.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind and come every day
to my cote and woo me.

ORLANDO.
Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me where it is.

ROSALIND.
Go with me to it, and I’ll show it you; and by the way you shall tell
me where in the forest you live. Will you go?

ORLANDO.
With all my heart, good youth.

ROSALIND.
Nay, you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the Forest

Enter Touchstone and Audrey; Jaques at a distance observing them.

TOUCHSTONE.
Come apace, good Audrey. I will fetch up your goats, Audrey. And how,
Audrey? Am I the man yet? Doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY.
Your features, Lord warrant us! What features?

TOUCHSTONE.
I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious poet, honest
Ovid, was among the Goths.

JAQUES.
[_Aside_.] O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove in a thatched
house!

TOUCHSTONE.
When a man’s verses cannot be understood, nor a man’s good wit seconded
with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than
a great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would the gods had made
thee poetical.

AUDREY.
I do not know what “poetical” is. Is it honest in deed and word? Is it
a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE.
No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most feigning, and lovers are
given to poetry, and what they swear in poetry may be said, as lovers,
they do feign.

AUDREY.
Do you wish, then, that the gods had made me poetical?

TOUCHSTONE.
I do, truly, for thou swear’st to me thou art honest. Now if thou wert
a poet, I might have some hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY.
Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE.
No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured; for honesty coupled to
beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

JAQUES.
[_Aside_.] A material fool!

AUDREY.
Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the gods make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat
into an unclean dish.

AUDREY.
I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

TOUCHSTONE.
Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness; sluttishness may come
hereafter. But be it as it may be, I will marry thee. And to that end I
have been with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next village, who
hath promised to meet me in this place of the forest and to couple us.

JAQUES.
[_Aside_.] I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY.
Well, the gods give us joy!

TOUCHSTONE.
Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this
attempt, for here we have no temple but the wood, no assembly but
horn-beasts. But what though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
necessary. It is said, “Many a man knows no end of his goods.” Right.
Many a man has good horns and knows no end of them. Well, that is the
dowry of his wife; ’tis none of his own getting. Horns? Even so. Poor
men alone? No, no, the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is
the single man therefore blessed? No. As a walled town is more worthier
than a village, so is the forehead of a married man more honourable
than the bare brow of a bachelor. And by how much defence is better
than no skill, by so much is horn more precious than to want.

Enter Sir Oliver Martext.

Here comes Sir Oliver. Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met. Will you
dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your
chapel?

MARTEXT.
Is there none here to give the woman?

TOUCHSTONE.
I will not take her on gift of any man.

MARTEXT.
Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES.
[_Coming forward_.] Proceed, proceed. I’ll give her.

TOUCHSTONE.
Good even, good Master What-ye-call’t, how do you, sir? You are very
well met. God ’ild you for your last company. I am very glad to see
you. Even a toy in hand here, sir. Nay, pray be covered.

JAQUES.
Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE.
As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the falcon her
bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would
be nibbling.

JAQUES.
And will you, being a man of your breeding, be married under a bush
like a beggar? Get you to church, and have a good priest that can tell
you what marriage is. This fellow will but join you together as they
join wainscot; then one of you will prove a shrunk panel, and like
green timber, warp, warp.

TOUCHSTONE.
[_Aside_.] I am not in the mind but I were better to be married of him
than of another, for he is not like to marry me well, and not being
well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my
wife.

JAQUES.
Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE.
Come, sweet Audrey. We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
Farewell, good Master Oliver. Not
             _O sweet Oliver,
             O brave Oliver,
         Leave me not behind thee._
But
             _Wind away,—
             Begone, I say,
         I will not to wedding with thee._

[_Exeunt Touchstone, Audrey and Jaques._]

MARTEXT.
’Tis no matter. Ne’er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me
out of my calling.

[_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the Forest. Before a Cottage

Enter Rosalind and Celia.

ROSALIND.
Never talk to me, I will weep.

CELIA.
Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not
become a man.

ROSALIND.
But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA.
As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.

ROSALIND.
His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

CELIA.
Something browner than Judas’s. Marry, his kisses are Judas’s own
children.

ROSALIND.
I’ faith, his hair is of a good colour.

CELIA.
An excellent colour. Your chestnut was ever the only colour.

ROSALIND.
And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.

CELIA.
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A nun of winter’s
sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of chastity is in
them.

ROSALIND.
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?

CELIA.
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND.
Do you think so?

CELIA.
Yes. I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer, but for his
verity in love, I do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
worm-eaten nut.

ROSALIND.
Not true in love?

CELIA.
Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.

ROSALIND.
You have heard him swear downright he was.

CELIA.
“Was” is not “is”. Besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the
word of a tapster. They are both the confirmer of false reckonings. He
attends here in the forest on the Duke your father.

ROSALIND.
I met the Duke yesterday, and had much question with him. He asked me
of what parentage I was. I told him, of as good as he, so he laughed
and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when there is such a man as
Orlando?

CELIA.
O, that’s a brave man! He writes brave verses, speaks brave words,
swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite traverse, athwart
the heart of his lover, as a puny tilter, that spurs his horse but on
one side, breaks his staff like a noble goose. But all’s brave that
youth mounts and folly guides. Who comes here?

Enter Corin.

CORIN.
Mistress and master, you have oft enquired
After the shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.

CELIA.
Well, and what of him?

CORIN.
If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you,
If you will mark it.

ROSALIND.
O, come, let us remove.
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I’ll prove a busy actor in their play.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another part of the Forest

Enter Silvius and Phoebe.

SILVIUS.
Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me, do not, Phoebe.
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart th’ accustomed sight of death makes hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

Enter Rosalind, Celia and Corin, at a distance.

PHOEBE.
I would not be thy executioner;
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell’st me there is murder in mine eye.
’Tis pretty, sure, and very probable
That eyes, that are the frail’st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it; lean upon a rush,
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
Nor I am sure there is not force in eyes
That can do hurt.

SILVIUS.
O dear Phoebe,
If ever—as that ever may be near—
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That love’s keen arrows make.

PHOEBE.
But till that time
Come not thou near me. And when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.

ROSALIND.
[_Advancing_.] And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty—
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
Than without candle may go dark to bed—
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Of nature’s sale-work. ’Od’s my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it.
’Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
That can entame my spirits to your worship.
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south, puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. ’Tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favoured children.
’Tis not her glass but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.
But, mistress, know yourself; down on your knees,
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man’s love.
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can; you are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer;
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.

PHOEBE.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together!
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

ROSALIND.
He’s fall’n in love with your foulness, and she’ll fall in love with my
anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks,
I’ll sauce her with bitter words. Why look you so upon me?

PHOEBE.
For no ill will I bear you.

ROSALIND.
I pray you do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine.
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
’Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud. Though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Come, to our flock.

[_Exeunt Rosalind, Celia and Corin._]

PHOEBE.
Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
“Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?”

SILVIUS.
Sweet Phoebe—

PHOEBE.
Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS.
Sweet Phoebe, pity me.

PHOEBE.
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.

SILVIUS.
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief
Were both extermined.

PHOEBE.
Thou hast my love. Is not that neighbourly?

SILVIUS.
I would have you.

PHOEBE.
Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure, and I’ll employ thee too.
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.

SILVIUS.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then
A scattered smile, and that I’ll live upon.

PHOEBE.
Know’st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?

SILVIUS.
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.

PHOEBE.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him.
’Tis but a peevish boy—yet he talks well.
But what care I for words? Yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth—not very pretty—
But sure he’s proud, and yet his pride becomes him.
He’ll make a proper man. The best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offence, his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall, yet for his years he’s tall;
His leg is but so-so, and yet ’tis well.
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mixed in his cheek. ’Twas just the difference
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they marked him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him; but for my part
I love him not nor hate him not; and yet
I have more cause to hate him than to love him.
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me.
I marvel why I answered not again.
But that’s all one: omittance is no quittance.
I’ll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it. Wilt thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS.
Phoebe, with all my heart.

PHOEBE.
I’ll write it straight,
The matter’s in my head and in my heart.
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
Go with me, Silvius.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The Forest of Arden


Enter Rosalind, Celia and Jaques.

JAQUES.
I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with thee.

ROSALIND.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.

JAQUES.
I am so; I do love it better than laughing.

ROSALIND.
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows, and
betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards.

JAQUES.
Why, ’tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND.
Why then, ’tis good to be a post.

JAQUES.
I have neither the scholar’s melancholy, which is emulation; nor the
musician’s, which is fantastical; nor the courtier’s, which is proud;
nor the soldier’s, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer’s, which is
politic; nor the lady’s, which is nice; nor the lover’s, which is all
these; but it is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my
travels, in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous
sadness.

ROSALIND.
A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to be sad. I fear you
have sold your own lands to see other men’s. Then to have seen much and
to have nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

JAQUES.
Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND.
And your experience makes you sad. I had rather have a fool to make me
merry than experience to make me sad—and to travel for it too.

Enter Orlando.

ORLANDO.
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!

JAQUES.
Nay, then, God be wi’ you, an you talk in blank verse.

ROSALIND.
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller. Look you lisp and wear strange suits;
disable all the benefits of your own country; be out of love with your
nativity, and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are,
or I will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.

[_Exit Jaques._]

Why, how now, Orlando, where have you been all this while? You a lover!
An you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO.
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

ROSALIND.
Break an hour’s promise in love? He that will divide a minute into a
thousand parts, and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute
in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid hath clapped
him o’ the shoulder, but I’ll warrant him heart-whole.

ORLANDO.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. I had as lief be
wooed of a snail.

ORLANDO.
Of a snail?

ROSALIND.
Ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his
head—a better jointure, I think, than you make a woman. Besides, he
brings his destiny with him.

ORLANDO.
What’s that?

ROSALIND.
Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives
for. But he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his
wife.

ORLANDO.
Virtue is no horn-maker and my Rosalind is virtuous.

ROSALIND.
And I am your Rosalind.

CELIA.
It pleases him to call you so, but he hath a Rosalind of a better leer
than you.

ROSALIND.
Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday humour, and like enough
to consent. What would you say to me now, an I were your very, very
Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I would kiss before I spoke.

ROSALIND.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were gravelled for lack
of matter, you might take occasion to kiss. Very good orators, when
they are out, they will spit; and for lovers lacking—God warn
us—matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.

ORLANDO.
How if the kiss be denied?

ROSALIND.
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.

ORLANDO.
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?

ROSALIND.
Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or I should think my
honesty ranker than my wit.

ORLANDO.
What, of my suit?

ROSALIND.
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit. Am not I your
Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I take some joy to say you are because I would be talking of her.

ROSALIND.
Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.

ORLANDO.
Then, in mine own person, I die.

ROSALIND.
No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is almost six thousand years
old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person,
_videlicet_, in a love-cause. Troilus had his brains dashed out with a
Grecian club, yet he did what he could to die before, and he is one of
the patterns of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair year
though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been for a hot midsummer
night; for, good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont
and, being taken with the cramp, was drowned; and the foolish
chroniclers of that age found it was Hero of Sestos. But these are all
lies. Men have died from time to time and worms have eaten them, but
not for love.

ORLANDO.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for I protest her
frown might kill me.

ROSALIND.
By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now I will be your
Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will, I
will grant it.

ORLANDO.
Then love me, Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.

ORLANDO.
And wilt thou have me?

ROSALIND.
Ay, and twenty such.

ORLANDO.
What sayest thou?

ROSALIND.
Are you not good?

ORLANDO.
I hope so.

ROSALIND.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?—Come, sister, you
shall be the priest and marry us.—Give me your hand, Orlando.—What do
you say, sister?

ORLANDO.
Pray thee, marry us.

CELIA.
I cannot say the words.

ROSALIND.
You must begin “Will you, Orlando—”


CELIA.
Go to.—Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I will.

ROSALIND.
Ay, but when?

ORLANDO.
Why now, as fast as she can marry us.

ROSALIND.
Then you must say “I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.”

ORLANDO.
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ROSALIND.
I might ask you for your commission. But I do take thee, Orlando, for
my husband. There’s a girl goes before the priest, and certainly a
woman’s thought runs before her actions.

ORLANDO.
So do all thoughts. They are winged.

ROSALIND.
Now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her.

ORLANDO.
For ever and a day.

ROSALIND.
Say “a day” without the “ever.” No, no, Orlando, men are April when
they woo, December when they wed. Maids are May when they are maids,
but the sky changes when they are wives. I will be more jealous of thee
than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen, more clamorous than a parrot
against rain, more new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires
than a monkey. I will weep for nothing, like Diana in the fountain, and
I will do that when you are disposed to be merry. I will laugh like a
hyena, and that when thou are inclined to sleep.

ORLANDO.
But will my Rosalind do so?

ROSALIND.
By my life, she will do as I do.

ORLANDO.
O, but she is wise.

ROSALIND.
Or else she could not have the wit to do this. The wiser, the
waywarder. Make the doors upon a woman’s wit, and it will out at the
casement. Shut that, and ’twill out at the keyhole. Stop that, ’twill
fly with the smoke out at the chimney.

ORLANDO.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say, “Wit, whither
wilt?”

ROSALIND.
Nay, you might keep that check for it till you met your wife’s wit
going to your neighbour’s bed.

ORLANDO.
And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

ROSALIND.
Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall never take her
without her answer unless you take her without her tongue. O, that
woman that cannot make her fault her husband’s occasion, let her never
nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool.

ORLANDO.
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.

ROSALIND.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.

ORLANDO.
I must attend the Duke at dinner. By two o’clock I will be with thee
again.

ROSALIND.
Ay, go your ways, go your ways. I knew what you would prove. My friends
told me as much, and I thought no less. That flattering tongue of yours
won me. ’Tis but one cast away, and so, come death! Two o’clock is your
hour?

ORLANDO.
Ay, sweet Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty
oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your promise or
come one minute behind your hour, I will think you the most pathetical
break-promise, and the most hollow lover, and the most unworthy of her
you call Rosalind that may be chosen out of the gross band of the
unfaithful. Therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise.

ORLANDO.
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my Rosalind. So, adieu.

ROSALIND.
Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let
time try. Adieu.

[_Exit Orlando._]

CELIA.
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate! We must have your
doublet and hose plucked over your head and show the world what the
bird hath done to her own nest.

ROSALIND.
O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst know how many
fathom deep I am in love! But it cannot be sounded; my affection hath
an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.

CELIA.
Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, it runs
out.

ROSALIND.
No, that same wicked bastard of Venus, that was begot of thought,
conceived of spleen, and born of madness, that blind rascally boy that
abuses everyone’s eyes because his own are out, let him be judge how
deep I am in love. I’ll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight
of Orlando. I’ll go find a shadow and sigh till he come.

CELIA.
And I’ll sleep.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the Forest

Enter Jaques and Lords, like foresters.

JAQUES.
Which is he that killed the deer?

FIRST LORD.
Sir, it was I.

JAQUES.
Let’s present him to the Duke, like a Roman conqueror, and it would do
well to set the deer’s horns upon his head for a branch of victory.
Have you no song, forester, for this purpose?

SECOND LORD.
Yes, sir.

JAQUES.
Sing it. ’Tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.

SONG

SECOND LORD.
[_Sings_.]
  What shall he have that killed the deer?
        His leather skin and horns to wear.
                  Then sing him home:
  [_The rest shall bear this burden_.]
            Take thou no scorn to wear the horn.
            It was a crest ere thou wast born.
                  Thy father’s father wore it
                  And thy father bore it.
            The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
            Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the Forest

Enter Rosalind and Celia.

ROSALIND.
How say you now? Is it not past two o’clock? And here much Orlando.

CELIA.
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain he hath ta’en his bow
and arrows and is gone forth to sleep.

Enter Silvius.

Look who comes here.

SILVIUS.
My errand is to you, fair youth.
My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you this.

[_Giving a letter._]

I know not the contents, but, as I guess
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me,
I am but as a guiltless messenger.

ROSALIND.
Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all!
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners;
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
Were man as rare as phoenix. ’Od’s my will,
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt.
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS.
No, I protest, I know not the contents.
Phoebe did write it.

ROSALIND.
Come, come, you are a fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand. She has a leathern hand,
A freestone-coloured hand. I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but ’twas her hands.
She has a huswife’s hand—but that’s no matter.
I say she never did invent this letter;
This is a man’s invention, and his hand.

SILVIUS.
Sure, it is hers.

ROSALIND.
Why, ’tis a boisterous and a cruel style,
A style for challengers. Why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian. Women’s gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS.
So please you, for I never heard it yet,
Yet heard too much of Phoebe’s cruelty.

ROSALIND.
She Phoebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes.

[_Reads._]

            _Art thou god to shepherd turned,
            That a maiden’s heart hath burned?_
Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS.
Call you this railing?

ROSALIND.
            _Why, thy godhead laid apart,
            Warr’st thou with a woman’s heart?_
Did you ever hear such railing?
            _Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
            That could do no vengeance to me._
Meaning me a beast.
            _If the scorn of your bright eyne
            Have power to raise such love in mine,
            Alack, in me what strange effect
            Would they work in mild aspect?
            Whiles you chid me, I did love,
            How then might your prayers move?
            He that brings this love to thee
            Little knows this love in me;
            And by him seal up thy mind,
            Whether that thy youth and kind
            Will the faithful offer take
            Of me, and all that I can make,
            Or else by him my love deny,
            And then I’ll study how to die._

SILVIUS.
Call you this chiding?

CELIA.
Alas, poor shepherd.

ROSALIND.
Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity.—Wilt thou love such a woman?
What, to make thee an instrument and play false strains upon thee? Not
to be endured! Well, go your way to her, for I see love hath made thee
a tame snake, and say this to her: that if she love me, I charge her to
love thee; if she will not, I will never have her unless thou entreat
for her. If you be a true lover, hence, and not a word, for here comes
more company.

[_Exit Silvius._]

Enter Oliver.

OLIVER.
Good morrow, fair ones. Pray you, if you know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA.
West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom;
The rank of osiers, by the murmuring stream,
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself.
There’s none within.

OLIVER.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description,
Such garments, and such years. “The boy is fair,
Of female favour, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister; the woman low,
And browner than her brother.” Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA.
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.

OLIVER.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?

ROSALIND.
I am. What must we understand by this?

OLIVER.
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkerchief was stained.

CELIA.
I pray you tell it.

OLIVER.
When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell. He threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself.
Under an oak, whose boughs were mossed with age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched ragged man, o’ergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back; about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approached
The opening of his mouth. But suddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself
And with indented glides did slip away
Into a bush; under which bush’s shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir. For ’tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.

OLIVER.
And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND.
But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?

OLIVER.
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so;
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.

CELIA.
Are you his brother?

ROSALIND.
Was it you he rescued?

CELIA.
Was’t you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER.
’Twas I; but ’tis not I. I do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.

ROSALIND.
But, for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER.
By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed—
As how I came into that desert place—
In brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother’s love,
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin,
Dyed in his blood, unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.

[_Rosalind faints._]

CELIA.
Why, how now, Ganymede, sweet Ganymede!

OLIVER.
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

CELIA.
There is more in it. Cousin—Ganymede!

OLIVER.
Look, he recovers.

ROSALIND.
I would I were at home.

CELIA.
We’ll lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER.
Be of good cheer, youth. You a man? You lack a man’s heart.

ROSALIND.
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well
counterfeited. I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfeited.
Heigh-ho.

OLIVER.
This was not counterfeit. There is too great testimony in your
complexion that it was a passion of earnest.

ROSALIND.
Counterfeit, I assure you.

OLIVER.
Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to be a man.

ROSALIND.
So I do. But, i’ faith, I should have been a woman by right.

CELIA.
Come, you look paler and paler. Pray you draw homewards. Good sir, go
with us.

OLIVER.
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
I shall devise something. But I pray you commend my counterfeiting to
him. Will you go?

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The Forest of Arden


Enter Touchstone and Audrey.

TOUCHSTONE.
We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.

AUDREY.
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman’s saying.

TOUCHSTONE.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext. But Audrey,
there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.

AUDREY.
Ay, I know who ’tis. He hath no interest in me in the world.

Enter William.

Here comes the man you mean.

TOUCHSTONE.
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown. By my troth, we that have
good wits have much to answer for. We shall be flouting; we cannot
hold.

WILLIAM.
Good ev’n, Audrey.

AUDREY.
God ye good ev’n, William.

WILLIAM.
And good ev’n to you, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
Good ev’n, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head. Nay, prithee,
be covered. How old are you, friend?

WILLIAM.
Five-and-twenty, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
A ripe age. Is thy name William?

WILLIAM.
William, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
A fair name. Wast born i’ th’ forest here?

WILLIAM.
Ay, sir, I thank God.

TOUCHSTONE.
“Thank God.” A good answer. Art rich?

WILLIAM.
Faith, sir, so-so.

TOUCHSTONE.
“So-so” is good, very good, very excellent good. And yet it is not, it
is but so-so. Art thou wise?

WILLIAM.
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

TOUCHSTONE.
Why, thou sayst well. I do now remember a saying: “The fool doth think
he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.” The heathen
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips
when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby that grapes were made to
eat and lips to open. You do love this maid?

WILLIAM.
I do, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?

WILLIAM.
No, sir.

TOUCHSTONE.
Then learn this of me: to have is to have. For it is a figure in
rhetoric that drink, being poured out of cup into a glass, by filling
the one doth empty the other. For all your writers do consent that
_ipse_ is “he.” Now, you are not _ipse_, for I am he.

WILLIAM.
Which he, sir?

TOUCHSTONE.
He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you clown,
abandon—which is in the vulgar, “leave”—the society—which in the
boorish is “company”—of this female—which in the common is “woman”;
which together is, abandon the society of this female, or, clown, thou
perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, I kill
thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into
bondage. I will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel.
I will bandy with thee in faction; will o’errun thee with policy. I
will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways! Therefore tremble and depart.

AUDREY.
Do, good William.

WILLIAM.
God rest you merry, sir.

[_Exit._]

Enter Corin.

CORIN.
Our master and mistress seek you. Come away, away.

TOUCHSTONE.
Trip, Audrey, trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the Forest

Enter Orlando and Oliver.

ORLANDO.
Is’t possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her? That
but seeing, you should love her? And loving woo? And wooing, she should
grant? And will you persever to enjoy her?

OLIVER.
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty of her, the
small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting. But
say with me, I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me; consent
with both that we may enjoy each other. It shall be to your good, for
my father’s house and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowland’s will I
estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.

Enter Rosalind.

ORLANDO.
You have my consent. Let your wedding be tomorrow. Thither will I
invite the Duke and all’s contented followers. Go you and prepare
Aliena; for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
God save you, brother.

OLIVER.
And you, fair sister.

[_Exit._]

ROSALIND.
O my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a
scarf!

ORLANDO.
It is my arm.

ROSALIND.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.

ORLANDO.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

ROSALIND.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed
me your handkercher?

ORLANDO.
Ay, and greater wonders than that.

ROSALIND.
O, I know where you are. Nay, ’tis true. There was never anything so
sudden but the fight of two rams, and Caesar’s thrasonical brag of “I
came, saw and overcame.” For your brother and my sister no sooner met
but they looked; no sooner looked but they loved; no sooner loved but
they sighed; no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason; no
sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy; and in these degrees
have they made pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb
incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage. They are in the
very wrath of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.

ORLANDO.
They shall be married tomorrow, and I will bid the Duke to the nuptial.
But O, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another
man’s eyes! By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at the height of
heart-heaviness, by how much I shall think my brother happy in having
what he wishes for.

ROSALIND.
Why, then, tomorrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?

ORLANDO.
I can live no longer by thinking.

ROSALIND.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking. Know of me then—for
now I speak to some purpose—that I know you are a gentleman of good
conceit. I speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my
knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are. Neither do I labour for a
greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you,
to do yourself good, and not to grace me. Believe then, if you please,
that I can do strange things. I have, since I was three year old,
conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not
damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture
cries it out, when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her. I
know into what straits of fortune she is driven and it is not
impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her
before your eyes tomorrow, human as she is, and without any danger.

ORLANDO.
Speak’st thou in sober meanings?

ROSALIND.
By my life, I do, which I tender dearly, though I say I am a magician.
Therefore put you in your best array, bid your friends; for if you will
be married tomorrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.

Enter Silvius and Phoebe.

Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.

PHOEBE.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
To show the letter that I writ to you.

ROSALIND.
I care not if I have; it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd.
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.

PHOEBE.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what ’tis to love.

SILVIUS.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE.
And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO.
And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
And I for no woman.

SILVIUS.
It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE.
And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO.
And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
And I for no woman.

SILVIUS.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion, and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE.
And so am I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO.
And so am I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND.
And so am I for no woman.

PHOEBE.
[_To Rosalind_.] If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

SILVIUS.
[_To Phoebe_.] If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ROSALIND.
Why do you speak too, “Why blame you me to love you?”

ORLANDO.
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

ROSALIND.
Pray you, no more of this, ’tis like the howling of Irish wolves
against the moon.
[_to Silvius_.] I will help you if I can.
[_to Phoebe_.] I would love you if I could.—Tomorrow meet me all
together.
[_to Phoebe_.] I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and I’ll be
married tomorrow.
[_to Orlando_.] I will satisfy you if ever I satisfied man, and you
shall be married tomorrow.
[_to Silvius_.] I will content you, if what pleases you contents you,
and you shall be married tomorrow.
[_to Orlando_.] As you love Rosalind, meet.
[_to Silvius_.] As you love Phoebe, meet.—And as I love no woman, I’ll
meet. So fare you well. I have left you commands.

SILVIUS.
I’ll not fail, if I live.

PHOEBE.
Nor I.

ORLANDO.
Nor I.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another part of the Forest

Enter Touchstone and Audrey.

TOUCHSTONE.
Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey, tomorrow will we be married.

AUDREY.
I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is no dishonest desire
to desire to be a woman of the world.

Enter two Pages.

Here come two of the banished Duke’s pages.

FIRST PAGE.
Well met, honest gentleman.

TOUCHSTONE.
By my troth, well met. Come sit, sit, and a song.

SECOND PAGE.
We are for you, sit i’ th’ middle.

FIRST PAGE.
Shall we clap into’t roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we
are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice?

SECOND PAGE.
I’faith, i’faith, and both in a tune like two gipsies on a horse.

                        SONG

PAGES.
[_Sing_.]
    It was a lover and his lass,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    That o’er the green cornfield did pass
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

    Between the acres of the rye,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    These pretty country folks would lie,
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

    This carol they began that hour,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    How that a life was but a flower,
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

    And therefore take the present time,
        With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
    For love is crowned with the prime,
        In the spring-time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
    Sweet lovers love the spring.

TOUCHSTONE
Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty,
yet the note was very untuneable.

FIRST PAGE.
You are deceived, sir, we kept time, we lost not our time.

TOUCHSTONE.
By my troth, yes. I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song.
God be wi’ you, and God mend your voices. Come, Audrey.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Another part of the Forest

Enter Duke Senior, Amiens, Jaques, Orlando, Oliver and Celia.

DUKE SENIOR.
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?

ORLANDO.
I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

Enter Rosalind, Silvius and Phoebe.

ROSALIND.
Patience once more whiles our compact is urged.
[_To the Duke._] You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?

DUKE SENIOR.
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

ROSALIND.
[_To Orlando_.] And you say you will have her when I bring her?

ORLANDO.
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

ROSALIND.
[_To Phoebe_.] You say you’ll marry me if I be willing?

PHOEBE.
That will I, should I die the hour after.

ROSALIND.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You’ll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?

PHOEBE.
So is the bargain.

ROSALIND.
[_To Silvius_.] You say that you’ll have Phoebe if she will?

SILVIUS.
Though to have her and death were both one thing.

ROSALIND.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter,
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter.
Keep your word, Phoebe, that you’ll marry me,
Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd.
Keep your word, Silvius, that you’ll marry her
If she refuse me. And from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.

[_Exeunt Rosalind and Celia._]

DUKE SENIOR.
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter’s favour.

ORLANDO.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.

Enter Touchstone and Audrey.

JAQUES.
There is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the
ark. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are
called fools.

TOUCHSTONE.
Salutation and greeting to you all.

JAQUES.
Good my lord, bid him welcome. This is the motley-minded gentleman that
I have so often met in the forest. He hath been a courtier, he swears.

TOUCHSTONE.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. I have trod a
measure; I have flattered a lady; I have been politic with my friend,
smooth with mine enemy; I have undone three tailors; I have had four
quarrels, and like to have fought one.

JAQUES.
And how was that ta’en up?

TOUCHSTONE.
Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.

JAQUES.
How seventh cause?—Good my lord, like this fellow?

DUKE SENIOR.
I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE.
God ’ild you, sir, I desire you of the like. I press in here, sir,
amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear and to forswear
according as marriage binds and blood breaks. A poor virgin, sir, an
ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor humour of mine, sir, to
take that that no man else will. Rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir,
in a poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR.
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

TOUCHSTONE.
According to the fool’s bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

JAQUES.
But, for the seventh cause. How did you find the quarrel on the seventh
cause?

TOUCHSTONE.
Upon a lie seven times removed—bear your body more seeming, Audrey—as
thus, sir. I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier’s beard. He sent
me word if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it
was. This is called the “retort courteous”. If I sent him word again it
was not well cut, he would send me word he cut it to please himself.
This is called the “quip modest”. If again it was not well cut, he
disabled my judgement. This is called the “reply churlish”. If again it
was not well cut, he would answer I spake not true. This is called the
“reproof valiant”. If again it was not well cut, he would say I lie.
This is called the “countercheck quarrelsome”, and so, to the “lie
circumstantial”, and the “lie direct”.

JAQUES.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?

TOUCHSTONE.
I durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, nor he durst not
give me the lie direct; and so we measured swords and parted.

JAQUES.
Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?

TOUCHSTONE.
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have books for good
manners. I will name you the degrees: the first, the retort courteous;
the second, the quip modest; the third, the reply churlish; the fourth,
the reproof valiant; the fifth, the countercheck quarrelsome; the
sixth, the lie with circumstance; the seventh, the lie direct. All
these you may avoid but the lie direct and you may avoid that too with
an “if”. I knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but
when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an
“if”, as, “if you said so, then I said so;” and they shook hands, and
swore brothers. Your “if” is the only peacemaker; much virtue in “if.”

JAQUES.
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? He’s as good at anything, and yet a
fool.

DUKE SENIOR.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of
that he shoots his wit.

Enter Hymen, Rosalind in woman’s clothes, and Celia. Still music.

HYMEN.
    Then is there mirth in heaven
    When earthly things made even
        Atone together.
    Good Duke, receive thy daughter.
    Hymen from heaven brought her,
        Yea, brought her hither,
    That thou mightst join her hand with his,
    Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND.
[_To Duke Senior_.] To you I give myself, for I am yours.
[_To Orlando_.] To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHOEBE.
If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu.

ROSALIND.
[_To Duke Senior_.] I’ll have no father, if you be not he.
[_To Orlando_.] I’ll have no husband, if you be not he.
[_To Phoebe_.] Nor ne’er wed woman, if you be not she.

HYMEN.
    Peace, ho! I bar confusion.
    ’Tis I must make conclusion
        Of these most strange events.
    Here’s eight that must take hands
    To join in Hymen’s bands,
        If truth holds true contents.
[_To Orlando and Rosalind_.] You and you no cross shall part.
[_To Celia and Oliver_.] You and you are heart in heart.
[_To Phoebe_.] You to his love must accord
Or have a woman to your lord.
[_To Audrey and Touchstone_.] You and you are sure together
As the winter to foul weather.
Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing,
Feed yourselves with questioning,
That reason wonder may diminish
How thus we met, and these things finish.

                         SONG
      Wedding is great Juno’s crown,
            O blessed bond of board and bed.
      ’Tis Hymen peoples every town,
            High wedlock then be honoured.
      Honour, high honour, and renown
      To Hymen, god of every town.

DUKE SENIOR.
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me
Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.

PHOEBE.
[_To Silvius_.] I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

Enter Jaques de Boys.

JAQUES DE BOYS.
Let me have audience for a word or two.
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword;
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
Where, meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banished brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true
I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR.
Welcome, young man.
Thou offer’st fairly to thy brother’s wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot;
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall’n dignity,
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music! And you brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy to th’ measures fall.

JAQUES.
Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.

JAQUES DE BOYS.
He hath.

JAQUES.
To him will I. Out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learned.
[_To Duke Senior_.] You to your former honour I bequeath;
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
[_To Orlando_.] You to a love that your true faith doth merit.
[_To Oliver_.] You to your land, and love, and great allies.
[_To Silvius_.] You to a long and well-deserved bed.
[_To Touchstone_.] And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled.—So to your pleasures,
I am for other than for dancing measures.

DUKE SENIOR.
Stay, Jaques, stay.

JAQUES.
To see no pastime, I. What you would have
I’ll stay to know at your abandoned cave.

[_Exit._]

DUKE SENIOR.
Proceed, proceed! We will begin these rites,
As we do trust they’ll end, in true delights.

[_Dance. Exeunt all but Rosalind._]

EPILOGUE

ROSALIND.
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue, but it is no more
unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. If it be true that good
wine needs no bush, ’tis true that a good play needs no epilogue. Yet
to good wine they do use good bushes, and good plays prove the better
by the help of good epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of
a good play! I am not furnished like a beggar; therefore to beg will
not become me. My way is to conjure you, and I’ll begin with the women.
I charge you, O women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of
this play as please you. And I charge you, O men, for the love you bear
to women—as I perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them—that
between you and the women the play may please. If I were a woman, I
would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions
that liked me, and breaths that I defied not. And I am sure as many as
have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will for my kind
offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

[_Exit._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEASURE FOR MEASURE ***




cover




MEASURE FOR MEASURE

by William Shakespeare




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. An apartment in the Duke’s palace
 Scene II. A street
 Scene III. A monastery
 Scene IV. A nunnery

 ACT II
 Scene I. A hall in Angelo’s house
 Scene II. Another room in the same
 Scene III. A room in a prison
 Scene IV. A room in Angelo’s house

 ACT III
 Scene I. A room in the prison
 Scene II. The street before the prisons

 ACT IV
 Scene I. A room in Mariana’s house
 Scene II. A room in the prison
 Scene III. Another room in the same
 Scene IV. A room in Angelo’s house
 Scene V. Fields without the town
 Scene VI. Street near the city gate

 ACT V
 Scene I. A public place near the city gate




Dramatis Personæ

Vincentio, DUKE of Vienna
ESCALUS, an ancient Lord
PROVOST
ELBOW, a simple constable
ABHORSON, an executioner
A JUSTICE
VARRIUS, a Gentleman, Servant to the Duke

ANGELO, Deputy to the Duke
MARIANA, betrothed to Angelo
BOY, singer
SERVANT, to Angelo
MESSENGER, from Angelo

ISABELLA, Sister to Claudio
FRANCISCA, a nun

CLAUDIO, a young Gentleman
JULIET, betrothed to Claudio
LUCIO, a fantastic
Two GENTLEMEN

FRIAR THOMAS
FRIAR PETER

Mistress Overdone, a BAWD
POMPEY, Servant to Mistress Overdone
FROTH, a foolish gentleman
BARNARDINE, a dissolute prisoner

Lords, Officers, Servants, Citizens and Attendants

SCENE: Vienna




ACT I

SCENE I. An apartment in the Duke’s palace.


Enter Duke, Escalus, Lords and Attendants.

DUKE.
Escalus.

ESCALUS.
My lord.

DUKE.
Of government the properties to unfold
Would seem in me t’ affect speech and discourse,
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you. Then no more remains
But that, to your sufficiency, as your worth is able,
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Our city’s institutions, and the terms
For common justice, you’re as pregnant in
As art and practice hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp.—Call hither,
I say, bid come before us, Angelo.

[_Exit an Attendant._]

What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply;
Lent him our terror, drest him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power. What think you of it?

ESCALUS.
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.

Enter Angelo.

DUKE.
Look where he comes.

ANGELO.
Always obedient to your Grace’s will,
I come to know your pleasure.

DUKE.
Angelo,
There is a kind of character in thy life
That to th’ observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike
As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touched
But to fine issues; nor nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise.
Hold, therefore, Angelo.
In our remove be thou at full ourself.
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission.

ANGELO.
Now, good my lord,
Let there be some more test made of my metal,
Before so noble and so great a figure
Be stamped upon it.

DUKE.
No more evasion.
We have with a leavened and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself, and leaves unquestioned
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us; and do look to know
What doth befall you here. So, fare you well.
To th’ hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions.

ANGELO.
Yet give leave, my lord,
That we may bring you something on the way.

DUKE.
My haste may not admit it;
Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
With any scruple. Your scope is as mine own,
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand;
I’ll privily away. I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes.
Though it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause and _Aves_ vehement;
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.

ANGELO.
The heavens give safety to your purposes!

ESCALUS.
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness.

DUKE.
I thank you. Fare you well.

[_Exit._]

ESCALUS.
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place.
A power I have, but of what strength and nature
I am not yet instructed.

ANGELO.
’Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.

ESCALUS.
I’ll wait upon your honour.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A street.

Enter Lucio and two other Gentlemen.

LUCIO.
If the Duke, with the other dukes, come not to composition with the
King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the King.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of Hungary’s!

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Amen.

LUCIO.
Thou conclud’st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to sea with the
ten commandments, but scraped one out of the table.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
“Thou shalt not steal”?

LUCIO.
Ay, that he razed.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Why, ’twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from
their functions! They put forth to steal. There’s not a soldier of us
all that, in the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition well
that prays for peace.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I never heard any soldier dislike it.

LUCIO.
I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was said.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
No? A dozen times at least.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
What? In metre?

LUCIO.
In any proportion or in any language.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I think, or in any religion.

LUCIO.
Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all controversy; as, for
example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all grace.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.

LUCIO.
I grant, as there may between the lists and the velvet. Thou art the
list.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
And thou the velvet. Thou art good velvet; thou’rt a three-piled piece,
I warrant thee. I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be
piled, as thou art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak feelingly
now?

LUCIO.
I think thou dost, and indeed, with most painful feeling of thy speech.
I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but,
whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

Enter Mistress Overdone, a Bawd.

LUCIO.
Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes! I have purchased as many
diseases under her roof as come to—

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
To what, I pray?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Judge.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
To three thousand dolours a year.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, and more.

LUCIO.
A French crown more.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Thou art always figuring diseases in me, but thou art full of error; I
am sound.

LUCIO.
Nay, not, as one would say, healthy, but so sound as things that are
hollow. Thy bones are hollow. Impiety has made a feast of thee.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
How now, which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?

BAWD.
Well, well! There’s one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth
five thousand of you all.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Who’s that, I pray thee?

BAWD.
Marry, sir, that’s Claudio, Signior Claudio.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Claudio to prison? ’Tis not so.

BAWD.
Nay, but I know ’tis so. I saw him arrested, saw him carried away; and,
which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.

LUCIO.
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art thou sure of
this?

BAWD.
I am too sure of it. And it is for getting Madam Julietta with child.

LUCIO.
Believe me, this may be. He promised to meet me two hours since, and he
was ever precise in promise-keeping.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Besides, you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such
a purpose.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.

LUCIO.
Away! Let’s go learn the truth of it.

[_Exeunt Lucio and Gentlemen._]

BAWD.
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows,
and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.

Enter Pompey.

How now? What’s the news with you?

POMPEY.
Yonder man is carried to prison.

BAWD.
Well, what has he done?

POMPEY.
A woman.

BAWD.
But what’s his offence?

POMPEY.
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

BAWD.
What? Is there a maid with child by him?

POMPEY.
No, but there’s a woman with maid by him. You have not heard of the
proclamation, have you?

BAWD.
What proclamation, man?

POMPEY.
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

BAWD.
And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY.
They shall stand for seed. They had gone down too, but that a wise
burgher put in for them.

BAWD.
But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?

POMPEY.
To the ground, mistress.

BAWD.
Why, here’s a change indeed in the commonwealth! What shall become of
me?

POMPEY.
Come, fear not you. Good counsellors lack no clients. Though you change
your place, you need not change your trade. I’ll be your tapster still.
Courage, there will be pity taken on you. You that have worn your eyes
almost out in the service, you will be considered.

Enter Provost, Claudio, Juliet and Officers.

BAWD.
What’s to do here, Thomas Tapster? Let’s withdraw.

POMPEY.
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the Provost to prison. And there’s
Madam Juliet.

[_Exeunt Bawd and Pompey._]

CLAUDIO.
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

PROVOST.
I do it not in evil disposition,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO.
Thus can the demi-god Authority
Make us pay down for our offence by weight.
The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still ’tis just.

Enter Lucio and two Gentlemen.

LUCIO.
Why, how now, Claudio? Whence comes this restraint?

CLAUDIO.
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty.
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
A thirsty evil; and when we drink, we die.

LUCIO.
If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of
my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery
of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. What’s thy offence,
Claudio?

CLAUDIO.
What but to speak of would offend again.

LUCIO.
What, is’t murder?

CLAUDIO.
No.

LUCIO.
Lechery?

CLAUDIO.
Call it so.

PROVOST.
Away, sir; you must go.

CLAUDIO.
One word, good friend.—Lucio, a word with you.

LUCIO.
A hundred, if they’ll do you any good. Is lechery so looked after?

CLAUDIO.
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Julietta’s bed.
You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward order. This we came not to
Only for propagation of a dower
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

LUCIO.
With child, perhaps?

CLAUDIO.
Unhappily, even so.
And the new deputy now for the Duke—
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place,
Or in his eminence that fills it up,
I stagger in—but this new governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscoured armour, hung by th’ wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round,
And none of them been worn; and for a name
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
Freshly on me. ’Tis surely for a name.

LUCIO.
I warrant it is. And thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a
milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. Send after the Duke, and
appeal to him.

CLAUDIO.
I have done so, but he’s not to be found.
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
This day my sister should the cloister enter,
And there receive her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
I have great hope in that. For in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect
Such as moves men; beside, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade.

LUCIO.
I pray she may, as well for the encouragement of the like, which else
would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life,
who I would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a game of
tick-tack. I’ll to her.

CLAUDIO.
I thank you, good friend Lucio.

LUCIO.
Within two hours.

CLAUDIO.
Come, officer, away.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A monastery.

Enter Duke and Friar Thomas.

DUKE.
No, holy father, throw away that thought;
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbour hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth.

FRIAR THOMAS.
May your Grace speak of it?

DUKE.
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed,
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, a witless bravery keeps.
I have delivered to Lord Angelo,
A man of stricture and firm abstinence,
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me travelled to Poland;
For so I have strewed it in the common ear,
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
You will demand of me why I do this?

FRIAR THOMAS.
Gladly, my lord.

DUKE.
We have strict statutes and most biting laws,
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,
Which for this fourteen years we have let slip,
Even like an o’ergrown lion in a cave
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threat’ning twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their children’s sight
For terror, not to use, in time the rod
Becomes more mocked than feared: so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
And liberty plucks justice by the nose,
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum.

FRIAR THOMAS.
It rested in your Grace
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased;
And it in you more dreadful would have seemed
Than in Lord Angelo.

DUKE.
I do fear, too dreadful.
Sith ’twas my fault to give the people scope,
’Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done
When evil deeds have their permissive pass
And not the punishment. Therefore, indeed, my father,
I have on Angelo imposed the office;
Who may in th’ ambush of my name strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
I will, as ’twere a brother of your order,
Visit both prince and people. Therefore, I prithee,
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear
Like a true friar. Moe reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone. Hence shall we see,
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A nunnery.

Enter Isabella and Francisca, a Nun.

ISABELLA.
And have you nuns no farther privileges?

FRANCISCA.
Are not these large enough?

ISABELLA.
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more,
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

LUCIO.
[_Within_.] Ho! Peace be in this place!

ISABELLA.
Who’s that which calls?

FRANCISCA.
It is a man’s voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.
When you have vowed, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the prioress;
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face;
Or if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again. I pray you answer him.

[_Exit Francisca._]

ISABELLA.
Peace and prosperity! Who is’t that calls?

Enter Lucio.

LUCIO.
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less. Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
A novice of this place, and the fair sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?

ISABELLA.
Why “her unhappy brother”? let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella, and his sister.

LUCIO.
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
Not to be weary with you, he’s in prison.

ISABELLA.
Woe me! For what?

LUCIO.
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.

ISABELLA.
Sir, make me not your story.

LUCIO.
’Tis true.
I would not, though ’tis my familiar sin
With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,
Tongue far from heart, play with all virgins so.
I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talked with in sincerity,
As with a saint.

ISABELLA.
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

LUCIO.
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, ’tis thus:
Your brother and his lover have embraced;
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

ISABELLA.
Someone with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

LUCIO.
Is she your cousin?

ISABELLA.
Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
By vain though apt affection.

LUCIO.
She it is.

ISABELLA.
O, let him marry her!

LUCIO.
This is the point.
The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His givings-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels
The wanton stings and motions of the sense;
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
He, to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law
As mice by lions, hath picked out an act,
Under whose heavy sense your brother’s life
Falls into forfeit. He arrests him on it,
And follows close the rigour of the statute
To make him an example. All hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo. And that’s my pith of business
’Twixt you and your poor brother.

ISABELLA.
Doth he so
Seek his life?

LUCIO.
Has censured him already;
And, as I hear, the Provost hath a warrant
For’s execution.

ISABELLA.
Alas, what poor ability’s in me
To do him good?

LUCIO.
Assay the power you have.

ISABELLA.
My power? Alas, I doubt.

LUCIO.
Our doubts are traitors,
And make us lose the good we oft might win
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.

ISABELLA.
I’ll see what I can do.

LUCIO.
But speedily.

ISABELLA.
I will about it straight;
No longer staying but to give the Mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.
Commend me to my brother. Soon at night
I’ll send him certain word of my success.

LUCIO.
I take my leave of you.

ISABELLA.
Good sir, adieu.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A hall in Angelo’s house.


Enter Angelo, Escalus, Servants, and a Justice.

ANGELO.
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape till custom make it
Their perch, and not their terror.

ESCALUS.
Ay, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
Than fall and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman,
Whom I would save, had a most noble father.
Let but your honour know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place, or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attained th’ effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Erred in this point which now you censure him,
And pulled the law upon you.

ANGELO.
’Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Another thing to fall. I not deny
The jury passing on the prisoner’s life
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try. What’s open made to justice,
That justice seizes. What knows the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? ’Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take ’t,
Because we see it; but what we do not see,
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I that censure him do so offend,
Let mine own judgement pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

Enter Provost.

ESCALUS.
Be it as your wisdom will.

ANGELO.
Where is the Provost?

PROVOST.
Here, if it like your honour.

ANGELO.
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine tomorrow morning.
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared,
For that’s the utmost of his pilgrimage.

[_Exit Provost._]

ESCALUS.
Well, heaven forgive him; and forgive us all.
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall.
Some run from brakes of vice, and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.

Enter Elbow and Officers with Froth and Pompey.

ELBOW.
Come, bring them away. If these be good people in a commonweal that do
nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law. Bring
them away.

ANGELO.
How now, sir, what’s your name? And what’s the matter?

ELBOW.
If it please your honour, I am the poor Duke’s constable, and my name
is Elbow. I do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring in here before your
good honour two notorious benefactors.

ANGELO.
Benefactors? Well, what benefactors are they? Are they not malefactors?

ELBOW.
If it please your honour, I know not well what they are, but precise
villains they are, that I am sure of, and void of all profanation in
the world that good Christians ought to have.

ESCALUS.
This comes off well. Here’s a wise officer.

ANGELO.
Go to. What quality are they of? Elbow is your name? Why dost thou not
speak, Elbow?

POMPEY.
He cannot, sir. He’s out at elbow.

ANGELO.
What are you, sir?

ELBOW.
He, sir? A tapster, sir; parcel bawd; one that serves a bad woman;
whose house, sir, was, as they say, plucked down in the suburbs; and
now she professes a hot-house, which, I think is a very ill house too.

ESCALUS.
How know you that?

ELBOW.
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour—

ESCALUS.
How? Thy wife?

ELBOW.
Ay, sir, whom I thank heaven is an honest woman—

ESCALUS.
Dost thou detest her therefore?

ELBOW.
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house,
if it be not a bawd’s house, it is pity of her life, for it is a
naughty house.

ESCALUS.
How dost thou know that, constable?

ELBOW.
Marry, sir, by my wife, who, if she had been a woman cardinally given,
might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness
there.

ESCALUS.
By the woman’s means?

ELBOW.
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone’s means; but as she spit in his face, so
she defied him.

POMPEY.
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

ELBOW.
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man, prove it.

ESCALUS.
[_To Angelo_.] Do you hear how he misplaces?

POMPEY.
Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your honour’s
reverence, for stewed prunes; sir, we had but two in the house, which
at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit dish, a dish of
some threepence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not china
dishes, but very good dishes—

ESCALUS.
Go to, go to. No matter for the dish, sir.

POMPEY.
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the right. But to the
point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and
being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for prunes; and having but
two in the dish, as I said, Master Froth here, this very man, having
eaten the rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very
honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could not give you
threepence again—

FROTH.
No, indeed.

POMPEY.
Very well. You being then, if you be remembered, cracking the stones of
the foresaid prunes—

FROTH.
Ay, so I did indeed.

POMPEY.
Why, very well. I telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a
one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they
kept very good diet, as I told you—

FROTH.
All this is true.

POMPEY.
Why, very well then—

ESCALUS.
Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose. What was done to Elbow’s
wife that he hath cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to
her.

POMPEY.
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

ESCALUS.
No, sir, nor I mean it not.

POMPEY.
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour’s leave. And I beseech
you, look into Master Froth here, sir, a man of fourscore pound a year;
whose father died at Hallowmas—was’t not at Hallowmas, Master Froth?

FROTH.
All-hallond Eve.

POMPEY.
Why, very well. I hope here be truths. He, sir, sitting, as I say, in a
lower chair, sir—’twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where, indeed, you have
a delight to sit, have you not?

FROTH.
I have so, because it is an open room, and good for winter.

POMPEY.
Why, very well then. I hope here be truths.

ANGELO.
This will last out a night in Russia
When nights are longest there. I’ll take my leave,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you’ll find good cause to whip them all.

ESCALUS.
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.

[_Exit Angelo._]

Now, sir, come on. What was done to Elbow’s wife, once more?

POMPEY.
Once, sir? There was nothing done to her once.

ELBOW.
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

POMPEY.
I beseech your honour, ask me.

ESCALUS.
Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?

POMPEY.
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman’s face. Good Master Froth,
look upon his honour; ’tis for a good purpose.—Doth your honour mark
his face?

ESCALUS.
Ay, sir, very well.

POMPEY.
Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.

ESCALUS.
Well, I do so.

POMPEY.
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?

ESCALUS.
Why, no.

POMPEY.
I’ll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him.
Good, then, if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master
Froth do the constable’s wife any harm? I would know that of your
honour.

ESCALUS.
He’s in the right. Constable. What say you to it?

ELBOW.
First, an it like you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a
respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected woman.

POMPEY.
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us
all.

ELBOW.
Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet! The time is yet to come
that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.

POMPEY.
Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

ESCALUS.
Which is the wiser here, Justice or Iniquity? Is this true?

ELBOW.
O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked Hannibal! I respected with
her before I was married to her? If ever I was respected with her, or
she with me, let not your worship think me the poor Duke’s officer.
Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or I’ll have mine action of battery
on thee.

ESCALUS.
If he took you a box o’ th’ ear, you might have your action of slander
too.

ELBOW.
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is’t your worship’s
pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?

ESCALUS.
Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst
discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou
know’st what they are.

ELBOW.
Marry, I thank your worship for it.—Thou seest, thou wicked varlet,
now, what’s come upon thee. Thou art to continue now, thou varlet, thou
art to continue.

ESCALUS.
[_To Froth_.] Where were you born, friend?

FROTH.
Here in Vienna, sir.

ESCALUS.
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

FROTH.
Yes, an’t please you, sir.

ESCALUS.
So. [_To Pompey_.] What trade are you of, sir?

POMPEY.
A tapster, a poor widow’s tapster.

ESCALUS.
Your mistress’ name?

POMPEY.
Mistress Overdone.

ESCALUS.
Hath she had any more than one husband?

POMPEY.
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.

ESCALUS.
Nine?—Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I would not have
you acquainted with tapsters; they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.

FROTH.
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never come into any room in
a taphouse but I am drawn in.

ESCALUS.
Well, no more of it, Master Froth. Farewell.

[_Exit Froth._]

Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What’s your name, Master
tapster?

POMPEY.
Pompey.

ESCALUS.
What else?

POMPEY.
Bum, sir.

ESCALUS.
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so that, in the
beastliest sense, you are Pompey the great. Pompey, you are partly a
bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you not?
Come, tell me true, it shall be the better for you.

POMPEY.
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

ESCALUS.
How would you live, Pompey? By being a bawd? What do you think of the
trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?

POMPEY.
If the law would allow it, sir.

ESCALUS.
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in
Vienna.

POMPEY.
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city?

ESCALUS.
No, Pompey.

POMPEY.
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to’t then. If your worship
will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the
bawds.

ESCALUS.
There is pretty orders beginning, I can tell you. It is but heading and
hanging.

POMPEY.
If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year
together, you’ll be glad to give out a commission for more heads. If
this law hold in Vienna ten year, I’ll rent the fairest house in it
after threepence a bay. If you live to see this come to pass, say
Pompey told you so.

ESCALUS.
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy, hark you: I
advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint
whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you do. If I do, Pompey, I shall
beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you. In plain
dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipped. So for this time, Pompey,
fare you well.

POMPEY.
I thank your worship for your good counsel. [_Aside_.] But I shall
follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.
Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade;
The valiant heart’s not whipped out of his trade.

[_Exit._]

ESCALUS.
Come hither to me, Master Elbow. Come hither, Master Constable. How
long have you been in this place of constable?

ELBOW.
Seven year and a half, sir.

ESCALUS.
I thought, by the readiness in the office, you had continued in it
sometime. You say seven years together?

ELBOW.
And a half, sir.

ESCALUS.
Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you wrong to put you so
oft upon’t. Are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?

ELBOW.
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters. As they are chosen, they
are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some piece of money, and go
through with all.

ESCALUS.
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most
sufficient of your parish.

ELBOW.
To your worship’s house, sir?

ESCALUS.
To my house. Fare you well.

[_Exit Elbow._]

What’s o’clock, think you?

JUSTICE.
Eleven, sir.

ESCALUS.
I pray you home to dinner with me.

JUSTICE.
I humbly thank you.

ESCALUS.
It grieves me for the death of Claudio,
But there’s no remedy.

JUSTICE.
Lord Angelo is severe.

ESCALUS.
It is but needful.
Mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
But yet, Poor Claudio! There’s no remedy.
Come, sir.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another room in the same.

Enter Provost and a Servant.

SERVANT.
He’s hearing of a cause. He will come straight.
I’ll tell him of you.

PROVOST.
Pray you do.

[_Exit Servant._]

I’ll know
His pleasure, may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream;
All sects, all ages, smack of this vice, and he
To die for ’t!

Enter Angelo.

ANGELO.
Now, what’s the matter, Provost?

PROVOST.
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?

ANGELO.
Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?

PROVOST.
Lest I might be too rash.
Under your good correction, I have seen
When, after execution, judgement hath
Repented o’er his doom.

ANGELO.
Go to; let that be mine.
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you shall well be spared.

PROVOST.
I crave your honour’s pardon.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She’s very near her hour.

ANGELO.
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place; and that with speed.

Enter Servant.

SERVANT.
Here is the sister of the man condemned
Desires access to you.

ANGELO.
Hath he a sister?

PROVOST.
Ay, my good lord, a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.

ANGELO.
Well, let her be admitted.

[_Exit Servant._]

See you the fornicatress be removed;
Let her have needful but not lavish means;
There shall be order for it.

Enter Lucio and Isabella.

PROVOST.
[_Offering to retire_.] Save your honour!

ANGELO.
Stay a little while. [_To Isabella_.] You are welcome. What’s your
will?

ISABELLA.
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Please but your honour hear me.

ANGELO.
Well, what’s your suit?

ISABELLA.
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war ’twixt will and will not.

ANGELO.
Well, the matter?

ISABELLA.
I have a brother is condemned to die;
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
And not my brother.

PROVOST.
Heaven give thee moving graces.

ANGELO.
Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault’s condemned ere it be done.
Mine were the very cipher of a function
To find the faults whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.

ISABELLA.
O just but severe law!
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!

[_Going._]

LUCIO.
[_To Isabella_.] Give’t not o’er so. To him again, entreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
You are too cold. If you should need a pin,
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
To him, I say.

ISABELLA.
Must he needs die?

ANGELO.
Maiden, no remedy.

ISABELLA.
Yes, I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

ANGELO.
I will not do’t.

ISABELLA.
But can you if you would?

ANGELO.
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.

ISABELLA.
But might you do’t, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touched with that remorse
As mine is to him?

ANGELO.
He’s sentenced, ’tis too late.

LUCIO.
[_To Isabella_.] You are too cold.

ISABELLA.
Too late? Why, no. I that do speak a word
May call it back again. Well, believe this:
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the king’s crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal’s truncheon, nor the judge’s robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you, and you as he,
You would have slipped like him, but he like you
Would not have been so stern.

ANGELO.
Pray you be gone.

ISABELLA.
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what ’twere to be a judge
And what a prisoner.

LUCIO.
[_Aside_.] Ay, touch him; there’s the vein.

ANGELO.
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.

ISABELLA.
Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once,
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be
If He, which is the top of judgement, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made.

ANGELO.
Be you content, fair maid.
It is the law, not I, condemns your brother.
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him. He must die tomorrow.

ISABELLA.
Tomorrow? O, that’s sudden! Spare him, spare him!
He’s not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season. Shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you.
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
There’s many have committed it.

LUCIO.
Ay, well said.

ANGELO.
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
Those many had not dared to do that evil
If the first that did th’ edict infringe
Had answered for his deed. Now ’tis awake,
Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass that shows what future evils,
Either now, or by remissness new conceived,
And so in progress to be hatched and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But, where they live, to end.

ISABELLA.
Yet show some pity.

ANGELO.
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismissed offence would after gall,
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies tomorrow; be content.

ISABELLA.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he that suffers. O, it is excellent
To have a giant’s strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.

LUCIO.
That’s well said.

ISABELLA.
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would ne’er be quiet,
For every pelting petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder.
Nothing but thunder. Merciful Heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As makes the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.

LUCIO.
O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent;
He’s coming. I perceive ’t.

PROVOST.
Pray heaven she win him.

ISABELLA.
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
Great men may jest with saints; ’tis wit in them,
But in the less, foul profanation.

LUCIO.
Thou’rt i’ th’ right, girl; more o’ that.

ISABELLA.
That in the captain’s but a choleric word
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

LUCIO.
Art advised o’ that? More on’t.

ANGELO.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?

ISABELLA.
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself
That skins the vice o’ th’ top. Go to your bosom,
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That’s like my brother’s fault. If it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother’s life.

ANGELO.
She speaks, and ’tis such sense
That my sense breeds with it. [_Going_.]
Fare you well.

ISABELLA.
Gentle my lord, turn back.

ANGELO.
I will bethink me. Come again tomorrow.

ISABELLA.
Hark how I’ll bribe you. Good my lord, turn back.

ANGELO.
How? Bribe me?

ISABELLA.
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

LUCIO.
You had marred all else.

ISABELLA.
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
Or stones, whose rates are either rich or poor
As fancy values them, but with true prayers,
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sunrise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.

ANGELO.
Well; come to me tomorrow.

LUCIO.
[_Aside to Isabella_.] Go to, ’tis well; away.

ISABELLA.
Heaven keep your honour safe.

ANGELO.
[_Aside_.] Amen.
For I am that way going to temptation,
Where prayers cross.

ISABELLA.
At what hour tomorrow
Shall I attend your lordship?

ANGELO.
At any time ’fore noon.

ISABELLA.
Save your honour.

[_Exeunt Isabella, Lucio and Provost._]

ANGELO.
From thee, even from thy virtue!
What’s this? What’s this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most, ha?
Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than woman’s lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live.
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again
And feast upon her eyes? What is’t I dream on?
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet
With all her double vigour, art, and nature,
Once stir my temper, but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Ever till now
When men were fond, I smiled and wondered how.

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A room in a prison.

Enter Duke disguised as a Friar, and Provost.

DUKE.
Hail to you, Provost, so I think you are.

PROVOST.
I am the Provost. What’s your will, good friar?

DUKE.
Bound by my charity and my blessed order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them, and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.

PROVOST.
I would do more than that, if more were needful.

Enter Juliet.

Look, here comes one, a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blistered her report. She is with child,
And he that got it, sentenced: a young man
More fit to do another such offence
Than die for this.

DUKE.
When must he die?

PROVOST.
As I do think, tomorrow.
[_To Juliet_.] I have provided for you; stay a while
And you shall be conducted.

DUKE.
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?

JULIET.
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.

DUKE.
I’ll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound
Or hollowly put on.

JULIET.
I’ll gladly learn.

DUKE.
Love you the man that wronged you?

JULIET.
Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.

DUKE.
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed?

JULIET.
Mutually.

DUKE.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

JULIET.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.

DUKE.
’Tis meet so, daughter; but lest you do repent
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear—

JULIET.
I do repent me as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.

DUKE.
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die tomorrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you! _Benedicite!_

[_Exit._]

JULIET.
Must die tomorrow? O, injurious love
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!

PROVOST.
’Tis pity of him.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Angelo’s house.

Enter Angelo.

ANGELO.
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words,
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel. Heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state whereon I studied
Is, like a good thing being often read,
Grown sere and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein—let no man hear me—I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.
Let’s write good angel on the devil’s horn.
’Tis not the devil’s crest.

[_Knock within._]

How now, who’s there?

Enter Servant.

SERVANT.
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

ANGELO.
Teach her the way.

[_Exit Servant._]

O heavens,
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons,
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive. And even so
The general subject to a well-wished king
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence.

Enter Isabella.

How now, fair maid?

ISABELLA.
I am come to know your pleasure.

ANGELO.
That you might know it, would much better please me
Than to demand what ’tis. Your brother cannot live.

ISABELLA.
Even so. Heaven keep your honour.

ANGELO.
Yet may he live a while. And, it may be,
As long as you or I. Yet he must die.

ISABELLA.
Under your sentence?

ANGELO.
Yea.

ISABELLA.
When, I beseech you? That in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.

ANGELO.
Ha! Fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven’s image
In stamps that are forbid. ’Tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.

ISABELLA.
’Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.

ANGELO.
Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother’s life; or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stained?

ISABELLA.
Sir, believe this:
I had rather give my body than my soul.

ANGELO.
I talk not of your soul. Our compelled sins
Stand more for number than for accompt.

ISABELLA.
How say you?

ANGELO.
Nay, I’ll not warrant that, for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Pronounce a sentence on your brother’s life.
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother’s life?

ISABELLA.
Please you to do’t,
I’ll take it as a peril to my soul;
It is no sin at all, but charity.

ANGELO.
Pleased you to do’t at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.

ISABELLA.
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it. You granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I’ll make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.

ANGELO.
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine. Either you are ignorant,
Or seem so, crafty; and that’s not good.

ISABELLA.
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.

ANGELO.
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself, as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, displayed. But mark me;
To be received plain, I’ll speak more gross.
Your brother is to die.

ISABELLA.
So.

ANGELO.
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.

ISABELLA.
True.

ANGELO.
Admit no other way to save his life—
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But, in the loss of question, that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-binding law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer,
What would you do?

ISABELLA.
As much for my poor brother as myself.
That is, were I under the terms of death,
Th’ impression of keen whips I’d wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere I’d yield
My body up to shame.

ANGELO.
Then must your brother die.

ISABELLA.
And ’twere the cheaper way.
Better it were a brother died at once
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die for ever.

ANGELO.
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slandered so?

ISABELLA.
Ignominy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses. Lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

ANGELO.
You seemed of late to make the law a tyrant,
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment than a vice.

ISABELLA.
O, pardon me, my lord. It oft falls out,
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean.
I something do excuse the thing I hate
For his advantage that I dearly love.

ANGELO.
We are all frail.

ISABELLA.
Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary but only he
Owe and succeed by weakness.

ANGELO.
Nay, women are frail too.

ISABELLA.
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women?—Help, heaven! Men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.

ANGELO.
I think it well.
And from this testimony of your own sex,
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is, a woman. If you be more, you’re none.
If you be one, as you are well expressed
By all external warrants, show it now
By putting on the destined livery.

ISABELLA.
I have no tongue but one. Gentle my lord,
Let me intreat you speak the former language.

ANGELO.
Plainly conceive, I love you.

ISABELLA.
My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for ’t.

ANGELO.
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.

ISABELLA.
I know your virtue hath a license in’t,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others.

ANGELO.
Believe me, on mine honour,
My words express my purpose.

ISABELLA.
Ha! Little honour to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for’t.
Sign me a present pardon for my brother
Or with an outstretched throat I’ll tell the world aloud
What man thou art.

ANGELO.
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoiled name, th’ austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i’ th’ state
Will so your accusation overweigh
That you shall stifle in your own report,
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein.
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes
That banish what they sue for. Redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will;
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To ling’ring sufferance. Answer me tomorrow,
Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
I’ll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can, my false o’erweighs your true.

[_Exit._]

ISABELLA.
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue
Either of condemnation or approof,
Bidding the law make curtsy to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to th’ appetite,
To follow as it draws! I’ll to my brother.
Though he hath fall’n by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he’d yield them up
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorred pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die.
More than our brother is our chastity.
I’ll tell him yet of Angelo’s request,
And fit his mind to death, for his soul’s rest.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A room in the prison.


Enter Duke, Claudio and Provost.

DUKE.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?

CLAUDIO.
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope.
I have hope to live, and am prepared to die.

DUKE.
Be absolute for death. Either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences
That dost this habitation where thou keep’st
Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art death’s fool;
For him thou labour’st by thy flight to shun,
And yet runn’st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
For all th’ accommodations that thou bear’st
Are nursed by baseness. Thou’rt by no means valiant;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provok’st, yet grossly fear’st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
For thou exists on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
For what thou hast not, still thou striv’st to get,
And what thou hast, forget’st. Thou art not certain;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou’rt poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear’st thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
But as it were an after-dinner’s sleep
Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty
To make thy riches pleasant. What’s yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid more thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.

CLAUDIO.
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die,
And seeking death, find life. Let it come on.

ISABELLA.
[_Within_.] What ho! Peace here; grace and good company!

PROVOST.
Who’s there? Come in. The wish deserves a welcome.

DUKE.
Dear sir, ere long I’ll visit you again.

CLAUDIO.
Most holy sir, I thank you.

Enter Isabella.

ISABELLA.
My business is a word or two with Claudio.

PROVOST.
And very welcome. Look, signior, here’s your sister.

DUKE.
Provost, a word with you.

PROVOST.
As many as you please.

DUKE.
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.

[_Exeunt Duke and Provost._]

CLAUDIO.
Now, sister, what’s the comfort?

ISABELLA.
Why,
As all comforts are, most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
Therefore your best appointment make with speed;
Tomorrow you set on.

CLAUDIO.
Is there no remedy?

ISABELLA.
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.

CLAUDIO.
But is there any?

ISABELLA.
Yes, brother, you may live.
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you’ll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.

CLAUDIO.
Perpetual durance?

ISABELLA.
Ay, just; perpetual durance; a restraint,
Though all the world’s vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.

CLAUDIO.
But in what nature?

ISABELLA.
In such a one as, you consenting to’t,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.

CLAUDIO.
Let me know the point.

ISABELLA.
O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honour. Dar’st thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle that we tread upon
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.

CLAUDIO.
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride
And hug it in mine arms.

ISABELLA.
There spake my brother! There my father’s grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die.
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i’ th’ head, and follies doth enew
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil.
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell.

CLAUDIO.
The precise Angelo?

ISABELLA.
O, ’tis the cunning livery of hell
The damned’st body to invest and cover
In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio,
If I would yield him my virginity
Thou mightst be freed?

CLAUDIO.
O heavens, it cannot be.

ISABELLA.
Yes, he would give it thee, from this rank offence,
So to offend him still. This night’s the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest tomorrow.

CLAUDIO.
Thou shalt not do’t.

ISABELLA.
O, were it but my life,
I’d throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.

CLAUDIO.
Thanks, dear Isabel.

ISABELLA.
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

CLAUDIO.
Yes. Has he affections in him
That thus can make him bite the law by th’ nose
When he would force it? Sure it is no sin;
Or of the deadly seven it is the least.

ISABELLA.
Which is the least?

CLAUDIO.
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!

ISABELLA.
What says my brother?

CLAUDIO.
Death is a fearful thing.

ISABELLA.
And shamed life a hateful.

CLAUDIO.
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprisoned in the viewless winds
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling—’tis too horrible.
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.

ISABELLA.
Alas, alas!

CLAUDIO.
Sweet sister, let me live.
What sin you do to save a brother’s life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.

ISABELLA.
O, you beast!
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Is’t not a kind of incest to take life
From thine own sister’s shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother played my father fair,
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne’er issued from his blood. Take my defiance,
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
I’ll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.

CLAUDIO.
Nay, hear me, Isabel.

ISABELLA.
O fie, fie, fie!
Thy sin’s not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd.
’Tis best that thou diest quickly.

[_Going._]

CLAUDIO.
O, hear me, Isabella.

Enter Duke as a Friar.

DUKE.
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

ISABELLA.
What is your will?

DUKE.
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some
speech with you. The satisfaction I would require is likewise your own
benefit.

ISABELLA.
I have no superfluous leisure, my stay must be stolen out of other
affairs, but I will attend you a while.

DUKE.
[_To Claudio aside_.] Son, I have overheard what hath passed between
you and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only
he hath made an assay of her virtue, to practise his judgement with the
disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her, hath
made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to receive. I am
confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true; therefore prepare
yourself to death. Do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are
fallible. Tomorrow you must die; go to your knees and make ready.

CLAUDIO.
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love with life that I will
sue to be rid of it.

DUKE.
Hold you there. Farewell.

[_Exit Claudio._]

Enter Provost.

Provost, a word with you.

PROVOST.
What’s your will, father?

DUKE.
That, now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me a while with the
maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my
company.

PROVOST.
In good time.

[_Exit Provost._]

DUKE.
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good. The goodness that
is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness; but grace, being the
soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair. The
assault that Angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my
understanding; and, but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I
should wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this substitute,
and to save your brother?

ISABELLA.
I am now going to resolve him. I had rather my brother die by the law
than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good
Duke deceived in Angelo! If ever he return, and I can speak to him, I
will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.

DUKE.
That shall not be much amiss. Yet, as the matter now stands, he will
avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only. Therefore fasten your
ear on my advisings, to the love I have in doing good, a remedy
presents itself. I do make myself believe that you may most
uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit; redeem your
brother from the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious person;
and much please the absent Duke, if peradventure he shall ever return
to have hearing of this business.

ISABELLA.
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do anything that
appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

DUKE.
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not heard speak of
Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great soldier who miscarried at
sea?

ISABELLA.
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

DUKE.
She should this Angelo have married, was affianced to her oath, and the
nuptial appointed. Between which time of the contract and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea, having in that
perished vessel the dowry of his sister. But mark how heavily this
befell to the poor gentlewoman. There she lost a noble and renowned
brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural; with him,
the portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage dowry; with both,
her combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.

ISABELLA.
Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?

DUKE.
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort,
swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries of dishonour;
in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for
his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but
relents not.

ISABELLA.
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world!
What corruption in this life, that it will let this man live! But how
out of this can she avail?

DUKE.
It is a rupture that you may easily heal, and the cure of it not only
saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.

ISABELLA.
Show me how, good father.

DUKE.
This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first
affection. His unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have
quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it
more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his requiring with a
plausible obedience; agree with his demands to the point. Only refer
yourself to this advantage: first, that your stay with him may not be
long; that the time may have all shadow and silence in it; and the
place answer to convenience. This being granted in course, and now
follows all. We shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your
appointment, go in your place. If the encounter acknowledge itself
hereafter, it may compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is
your brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged,
and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for
his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What think you of it?

ISABELLA.
The image of it gives me content already, and I trust it will grow to a
most prosperous perfection.

DUKE.
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to Angelo; if for
this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction.
I will presently to Saint Luke’s; there at the moated grange resides
this dejected Mariana. At that place call upon me; and dispatch with
Angelo, that it may be quickly.

ISABELLA.
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.

[_Exit Isabella._]

SCENE II. The street before the prison.

Enter Elbow, Pompey and Officers.

ELBOW.
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell
men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and
white bastard.

DUKE.
O heavens, what stuff is here?

POMPEY.
’Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest was put
down, and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him
warm; and furred with fox on lambskins too, to signify that craft,
being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.

ELBOW.
Come your way, sir.—Bless you, good father friar.

DUKE.
And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made you, sir?

ELBOW.
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him to be a
thief too, sir; for we have found upon him, sir, a strange picklock,
which we have sent to the deputy.

DUKE.
Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd;
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What ’tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice. Say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

POMPEY.
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir. But yet, sir, I would prove—

DUKE.
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer.
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.

ELBOW.
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning. The deputy
cannot abide a whoremaster. If he be a whoremonger and comes before
him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.

DUKE.
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
Free from our faults, as faults from seeming, free!

ELBOW.
His neck will come to your waist—a cord, sir.

Enter Lucio.

POMPEY.
I spy comfort, I cry bail! Here’s a gentleman, and a friend of mine.

LUCIO.
How now, noble Pompey? What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art thou led in
triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion’s images, newly made woman,
to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and extracting it
clutched? What reply, ha? What say’st thou to this tune, matter, and
method? Is’t not drowned i’ th’ last rain, ha? What say’st thou, trot?
Is the world as it was, man? Which is the way? Is it sad and few words?
Or how? The trick of it?

DUKE.
Still thus, and thus; still worse!

LUCIO.
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still, ha?

POMPEY.
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the
tub.

LUCIO.
Why, ’tis good. It is the right of it. It must be so. Ever your fresh
whore and your powdered bawd; an unshunned consequence; it must be so.
Art going to prison, Pompey?

POMPEY.
Yes, faith, sir.

LUCIO.
Why, ’tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell. Go, say I sent thee thither. For
debt, Pompey? Or how?

ELBOW.
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

LUCIO.
Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why,
’tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of antiquity, too. Bawd born.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison, Pompey. You will turn
good husband now, Pompey; you will keep the house.

POMPEY.
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.

LUCIO.
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will pray,
Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not patiently, why,
your mettle is the more. Adieu, trusty Pompey.—Bless you, friar.

DUKE.
And you.

LUCIO.
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?

ELBOW.
Come your ways, sir, come.

POMPEY.
You will not bail me then, sir?

LUCIO.
Then, Pompey, nor now.—What news abroad, friar? What news?

ELBOW.
Come your ways, sir, come.

LUCIO.
Go to kennel, Pompey, go.

[_Exeunt Elbow, Pompey and Officers._]

What news, friar, of the Duke?

DUKE.
I know none. Can you tell me of any?

LUCIO.
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is in Rome.
But where is he, think you?

DUKE.
I know not where, but wheresoever, I wish him well.

LUCIO.
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state and usurp
the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his
absence. He puts transgression to’t.

DUKE.
He does well in’t.

LUCIO.
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him. Something too
crabbed that way, friar.

DUKE.
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

LUCIO.
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is well allied;
but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and
drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and
woman after this downright way of creation. Is it true, think you?

DUKE.
How should he be made, then?

LUCIO.
Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he was begot between two
stockfishes. But it is certain that when he makes water, his urine is
congealed ice; that I know to be true. And he is a motion ungenerative;
that’s infallible.

DUKE.
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.

LUCIO.
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a
codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that is absent
have done this? Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a thousand. He had
some feeling of the sport; he knew the service, and that instructed him
to mercy.

DUKE.
I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was not
inclined that way.

LUCIO.
O, sir, you are deceived.

DUKE.
’Tis not possible.

LUCIO.
Who, not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use was to put a
ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crotchets in him. He would be
drunk too, that let me inform you.

DUKE.
You do him wrong, surely.

LUCIO.
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and I believe I
know the cause of his withdrawing.

DUKE.
What, I prithee, might be the cause?

LUCIO.
No, pardon. ’Tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips.
But this I can let you understand: the greater file of the subject held
the Duke to be wise.

DUKE.
Wise? Why, no question but he was.

LUCIO.
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.

DUKE.
Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking. The very stream of his
life, and the business he hath helmed, must upon a warranted need give
him a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own
bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a
statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you speak unskilfully. Or, if your
knowledge be more, it is much darkened in your malice.

LUCIO.
Sir, I know him, and I love him.

DUKE.
Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.

LUCIO.
Come, sir, I know what I know.

DUKE.
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But, if
ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to
make your answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke, you have
courage to maintain it. I am bound to call upon you, and I pray you
your name?

LUCIO.
Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.

DUKE.
He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.

LUCIO.
I fear you not.

DUKE.
O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me too
unhurtful an opposite. But indeed, I can do you little harm. You’ll
forswear this again.

LUCIO.
I’ll be hanged first! Thou art deceived in me, friar. But no more of
this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die tomorrow or no?

DUKE.
Why should he die, sir?

LUCIO.
Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke we talk of
were returned again. This ungenitured agent will unpeople the province
with continency. Sparrows must not build in his house-eaves because
they are lecherous. The Duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered.
He would never bring them to light. Would he were returned! Marry, this
Claudio is condemned for untrussing. Farewell, good friar, I prithee
pray for me. The Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Fridays. He’s now past it; yet, and, I say to thee, he would mouth with
a beggar though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so.
Farewell.

[_Exit._]

DUKE.
No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure ’scape. Back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?

Enter Escalus, Provost and Officers with Mistress Overdone, a Bawd.

ESCALUS.
Go, away with her to prison.

BAWD.
Good my lord, be good to me. Your honour is accounted a merciful man,
good my lord.

ESCALUS.
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the same kind? This
would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.

PROVOST.
A bawd of eleven years’ continuance, may it please your honour.

BAWD.
My lord, this is one Lucio’s information against me. Mistress Kate
Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke’s time; he promised her
marriage. His child is a year and a quarter old come Philip and Jacob.
I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me.

ESCALUS.
That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let him be called before us.
Away with her to prison. Go to, no more words.

[_Exeunt Officers with Bawd._]

Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered; Claudio must die
tomorrow. Let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable
preparation. If my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with
him.

PROVOST.
So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advised him for th’
entertainment of death.

ESCALUS.
Good even, good father.

DUKE.
Bliss and goodness on you!

ESCALUS.
Of whence are you?

DUKE.
Not of this country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time. I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the See
In special business from his Holiness.

ESCALUS.
What news abroad i’ th’ world?

DUKE.
None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
dissolution of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request, and as it
is as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is virtuous to
be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to
make societies secure; but security enough to make fellowships
accursed. Much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This news
is old enough, yet it is every day’s news. I pray you, sir, of what
disposition was the Duke?

ESCALUS.
One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know
himself.

DUKE.
What pleasure was he given to?

ESCALUS.
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at anything which
professed to make him rejoice. A gentleman of all temperance. But leave
we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous, and let
me desire to know how you find Claudio prepared. I am made to
understand that you have lent him visitation.

DUKE.
He professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but
most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice. Yet had
he framed to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many deceiving
promises of life, which I, by my good leisure, have discredited to him,
and now he is resolved to die.

ESCALUS.
You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt
of your calling. I have laboured for the poor gentleman to the
extremest shore of my modesty, but my brother justice have I found so
severe that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice.

DUKE.
If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it shall
become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced
himself.

ESCALUS.
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE.
Peace be with you.

[_Exeunt Escalus and Provost._]

He who the sword of heaven will bear
Should be as holy as severe,
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and virtue go;
More nor less to others paying
Than by self-offences weighing.
Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking!
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice, and let his grow!
O, what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outward side!
How may likeness, made in crimes,
Make practice on the times,
To draw with idle spiders’ strings
Most ponderous and substantial things!
Craft against vice I must apply.
With Angelo tonight shall lie
His old betrothed but despised.
So disguise shall, by th’ disguised,
Pay with falsehood false exacting,
And perform an old contracting.

[_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. A room in Mariana’s house.


Enter Mariana and a Boy singing.

                SONG
_  Take, O take those lips away,
      That so sweetly were forsworn,
  And those eyes, the break of day,
      Lights that do mislead the morn.
  But my kisses bring again,
                Bring again;
  Seals of love, but sealed in vain,
                Sealed in vain._

Enter Duke as a Friar.

MARIANA.
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often stilled my brawling discontent.

[_Exit Boy._]

I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical.
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

DUKE.
’Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
To make bad good and good provoke to harm.
I pray you tell me, hath anybody inquired for me here today? Much upon
this time have I promised here to meet.

MARIANA.
You have not been inquired after. I have sat here all day.

Enter Isabella.

DUKE.
I do constantly believe you. The time is come even now. I shall crave
your forbearance a little. Maybe I will call upon you anon for some
advantage to yourself.

MARIANA.
I am always bound to you.

[_Exit._]

DUKE.
Very well met, and welcome.
What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA.
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard backed;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate
That makes his opening with this bigger key.
This other doth command a little door
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads;
There have I made my promise, upon the
Heavy middle of the night to call on him.

DUKE.
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA.
I have ta’en a due and wary note upon’t;
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o’er.

DUKE.
Are there no other tokens
Between you ’greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA.
No, none, but only a repair i’ th’ dark,
And that I have possessed him my most stay
Can be but brief, for I have made him know
I have a servant comes with me along,
That stays upon me; whose persuasion is
I come about my brother.

DUKE.
’Tis well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this.—What ho, within! Come forth.

Enter Mariana.

I pray you be acquainted with this maid;
She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA.
I do desire the like.

DUKE.
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA.
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.

DUKE.
Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
I shall attend your leisure; but make haste.
The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA.
Will’t please you walk aside?

[_Exeunt Mariana and Isabella._]

DUKE.
O place and greatness, millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee; volumes of report
Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
Upon thy doings; thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dream
And rack thee in their fancies.

Enter Mariana and Isabella.

Welcome; how agreed?

ISABELLA.
She’ll take the enterprise upon her, father,
If you advise it.

DUKE.
It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.

ISABELLA.
Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
“Remember now my brother.”

MARIANA.
Fear me not.

DUKE.
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a pre-contract.
To bring you thus together ’tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go;
Our corn’s to reap, for yet our tithe’s to sow.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in the prison.

Enter Provost and Pompey.

PROVOST.
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man’s head?

POMPEY.
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a married man, he’s
his wife’s head, and I can never cut off a woman’s head.

PROVOST.
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer.
Tomorrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our
prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper; if you
will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem you from your gyves;
if not, you shall have your full time of imprisonment, and your
deliverance with an unpitied whipping; for you have been a notorious
bawd.

POMPEY.
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind, but yet I will be
content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to receive some
instruction from my fellow-partner.

PROVOST.
What ho, Abhorson! Where’s Abhorson, there?

Enter Abhorson.

ABHORSON.
Do you call, sir?

PROVOST.
Sirrah, here’s a fellow will help you tomorrow in your execution. If
you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide
here with you; if not, use him for the present, and dismiss him. He
cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.

ABHORSON.
A bawd, sir? Fie upon him, he will discredit our mystery.

PROVOST.
Go to, sir; you weigh equally. A feather will turn the scale.

[_Exit._]

POMPEY.
Pray, sir, by your good favour—for surely, sir, a good favour you have,
but that you have a hanging look—do you call, sir, your occupation a
mystery?

ABHORSON.
Ay, sir, a mystery.

POMPEY.
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your whores, sir,
being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation
a mystery. But what mystery there should be in hanging, if I should be
hanged, I cannot imagine.

ABHORSON.
Sir, it is a mystery.

POMPEY.
Proof.

ABHORSON.
Every true man’s apparel fits your thief. If it be too little for your
thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it be too big for your
thief, your thief thinks it little enough. So every true man’s apparel
fits your thief.

Enter Provost.

PROVOST.
Are you agreed?

POMPEY.
Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more penitent
trade than your bawd. He doth oftener ask forgiveness.

PROVOST.
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe tomorrow four o’clock.

ABHORSON.
Come on, bawd. I will instruct thee in my trade. Follow.

POMPEY.
I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion to use me
for your own turn, you shall find me yare. For truly, sir, for your
kindness I owe you a good turn.

PROVOST.
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.

[_Exeunt Abhorson and Pompey._]

Th’ one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murderer, though he were my brother.

Enter Claudio.

Look, here’s the warrant, Claudio, for thy death.
’Tis now dead midnight, and by eight tomorrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where’s Barnardine?

CLAUDIO.
As fast locked up in sleep as guiltless labour
When it lies starkly in the traveller’s bones.
He will not wake.

PROVOST.
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare yourself. [_Knocking within_.] But hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort!

[_Exit Claudio. Knock within._]

By and by!—
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
For the most gentle Claudio.

Enter Duke.

Welcome, father.

DUKE.
The best and wholesom’st spirits of the night
Envelop you, good Provost! Who called here of late?

PROVOST.
None, since the curfew rung.

DUKE.
Not Isabel?

PROVOST.
No.

DUKE.
They will then, ere’t be long.

PROVOST.
What comfort is for Claudio?

DUKE.
There’s some in hope.

PROVOST.
It is a bitter deputy.

DUKE.
Not so, not so. His life is paralleled
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice.
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others. Were he mealed with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
But this being so, he’s just.

[_Knocking within. Provost goes to the door._]

Now are they come.
This is a gentle provost. Seldom when
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.

[_Knocking within_.]

How now? What noise? That spirit’s possessed with haste
That wounds th’ unsisting postern with these strokes.

Provost returns.

PROVOST.
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in. He is called up.

DUKE.
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die tomorrow?

PROVOST.
None, sir, none.

DUKE.
As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning.

PROVOST.
Happily
You something know, yet I believe there comes
No countermand. No such example have we.
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Professed the contrary.

Enter a Messenger.

This is his Lordship’s man.

DUKE.
And here comes Claudio’s pardon.

MESSENGER.
My lord hath sent you this note, and by me this further charge: that
you swerve not from the smallest article of it, neither in time,
matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for, as I take it, it is
almost day.

PROVOST.
I shall obey him.

[_Exit Messenger._]

DUKE.
[_Aside_.] This is his pardon, purchased by such sin
For which the pardoner himself is in.
Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
When it is borne in high authority.
When vice makes mercy, mercy’s so extended
That for the fault’s love is th’ offender friended.
Now, sir, what news?

PROVOST.
I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office,
awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks strangely, for he
hath not used it before.

DUKE.
Pray you, let’s hear.

PROVOST.
[_Reads_.] _Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be
executed by four of the clock, and in the afternoon, Barnardine. For my
better satisfaction, let me have Claudio’s head sent me by five. Let
this be duly performed, with a thought that more depends on it than we
must yet deliver. Thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer
it at your peril._
What say you to this, sir?

DUKE.
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in th’ afternoon?

PROVOST.
A Bohemian born, but here nursed up and bred; one that is a prisoner
nine years old.

DUKE.
How came it that the absent Duke had not either delivered him to his
liberty, or executed him? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

PROVOST.
His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and indeed, his fact till
now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

DUKE.
It is now apparent?

PROVOST.
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

DUKE.
Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to be touched?

PROVOST.
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep;
careless, reckless, and fearless of what’s past, present, or to come;
insensible of mortality and desperately mortal.

DUKE.
He wants advice.

PROVOST.
He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the prison; give
him leave to escape hence, he would not. Drunk many times a day, if not
many days entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if to carry
him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it. It hath not
moved him at all.

DUKE.
More of him anon. There is written in your brow, Provost, honesty and
constancy; if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me. But in
the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself in hazard. Claudio, whom
here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than
Angelo who hath sentenced him. To make you understand this in a
manifested effect, I crave but four days’ respite, for the which you
are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.

PROVOST.
Pray, sir, in what?

DUKE.
In the delaying death.

PROVOST.
Alack, how may I do it? Having the hour limited, and an express
command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I
may make my case as Claudio’s, to cross this in the smallest.

DUKE.
By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions may be your
guide. Let this Barnardine be this morning executed, and his head borne
to Angelo.

PROVOST.
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

DUKE.
O, death’s a great disguiser, and you may add to it. Shave the head and
tie the beard, and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared
before his death. You know the course is common. If anything fall to
you upon this, more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom I
profess, I will plead against it with my life.

PROVOST.
Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.

DUKE.
Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the Deputy?

PROVOST.
To him and to his substitutes.

DUKE.
You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch the justice
of your dealing?

PROVOST.
But what likelihood is in that?

DUKE.
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you fearful, that
neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can with ease attempt you,
I will go further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. Look
you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the Duke. You know the
character, I doubt not, and the signet is not strange to you.

PROVOST.
I know them both.

DUKE.
The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall anon
over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within these two
days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he
this very day receives letters of strange tenour, perchance of the
Duke’s death, perchance entering into some monastery; but, by chance,
nothing of what is writ. Look, th’ unfolding star calls up the
shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these things should be.
All difficulties are but easy when they are known. Call your
executioner, and off with Barnardine’s head. I will give him a present
shrift, and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed; but this
shall absolutely resolve you. Come away; it is almost clear dawn.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Another room in the same.

Enter Pompey.

POMPEY.
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession. One
would think it were Mistress Overdone’s own house, for here be many of
her old customers. First, here’s young Master Rash; he’s in for a
commodity of brown paper and old ginger, nine score and seventeen
pounds; of which he made five marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was
not much in request, for the old women were all dead. Then is there
here one Master Caper, at the suit of Master Three-pile the mercer, for
some four suits of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a
beggar. Then have we here young Dizie, and young Master Deep-vow, and
Master Copperspur, and Master Starve-lackey, the rapier and dagger man,
and young Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master Forthright
the tilter, and brave Master Shoe-tie the great traveller, and wild
Half-can that stabbed Pots, and I think forty more, all great doers in
our trade, and are now “for the Lord’s sake.”

Enter Abhorson.

ABHORSON.
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.

POMPEY.
Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hanged, Master Barnardine.

ABHORSON.
What ho, Barnardine!

BARNARDINE.
[_Within_.] A pox o’ your throats! Who makes that noise there? What are
you?

POMPEY.
Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir, to rise and
be put to death.

BARNARDINE.
[_Within_.] Away, you rogue, away; I am sleepy.

ABHORSON.
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

POMPEY.
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep
afterwards.

ABHORSON.
Go in to him, and fetch him out.

POMPEY.
He is coming, sir, he is coming. I hear his straw rustle.

Enter Barnardine.

ABHORSON.
Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?

POMPEY.
Very ready, sir.

BARNARDINE.
How now, Abhorson? What’s the news with you?

ABHORSON.
Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers; for, look
you, the warrant’s come.

BARNARDINE.
You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not fitted for’t.

POMPEY.
O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night and is hanged betimes
in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next day.

Enter Duke.

ABHORSON.
Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father. Do we jest now, think
you?

DUKE.
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart,
I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with you.

BARNARDINE.
Friar, not I. I have been drinking hard all night, and I will have more
time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets. I
will not consent to die this day, that’s certain.

DUKE.
O, sir, you must; and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.

BARNARDINE.
I swear I will not die today for any man’s persuasion.

DUKE.
But hear you—

BARNARDINE.
Not a word. If you have anything to say to me, come to my ward, for
thence will not I today.

[_Exit._]

DUKE.
Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!
After him, fellows; bring him to the block.

[_Exeunt Abhorson and Pompey._]

Enter Provost.

PROVOST.
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?

DUKE.
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable.

PROVOST.
Here in the prison, father,
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
A man of Claudio’s years; his beard and head
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined,
And satisfy the Deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?

DUKE.
O, ’tis an accident that heaven provides!
Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
Prefixed by Angelo. See this be done,
And sent according to command, whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

PROVOST.
This shall be done, good father, presently.
But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive?

DUKE.
Let this be done:
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To yonder generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.

PROVOST.
I am your free dependant.

DUKE.
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.

[_Exit Provost._]

Now will I write letters to Angelo,
The Provost, he shall bear them, whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home;
And that by great injunctions I am bound
To enter publicly. Him I’ll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount,
A league below the city; and from thence,
By cold gradation and well-balanced form.
We shall proceed with Angelo.

Enter Provost.

PROVOST.
Here is the head; I’ll carry it myself.

DUKE.
Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours.

PROVOST.
I’ll make all speed.

[_Exit._]

ISABELLA.
[_Within_.] Peace, ho, be here!

DUKE.
The tongue of Isabel. She’s come to know
If yet her brother’s pardon be come hither.
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair
When it is least expected.

Enter Isabella.

ISABELLA.
Ho, by your leave!

DUKE.
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

ISABELLA.
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the Deputy sent my brother’s pardon?

DUKE.
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world.
His head is off, and sent to Angelo.

ISABELLA.
Nay, but it is not so.

DUKE.
It is no other.
Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.

ISABELLA.
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

DUKE.
You shall not be admitted to his sight.

ISABELLA.
Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!
Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!

DUKE.
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot.
Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity.
The Duke comes home tomorrow;—nay, dry your eyes.
One of our convent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honour.

ISABELLA.
I am directed by you.

DUKE.
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
’Tis that he sent me of the Duke’s return.
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana’s house tonight. Her cause and yours
I’ll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred vow,
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
If I pervert your course.—Who’s here?

Enter Lucio.

LUCIO.
Good even. Friar, where is the Provost?

DUKE.
Not within, sir.

LUCIO.
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red.
Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran. I
dare not for my head fill my belly. One fruitful meal would set me
to’t. But they say the Duke will be here tomorrow. By my troth, Isabel,
I loved thy brother. If the old fantastical duke of dark corners had
been at home, he had lived.

[_Exit Isabella._]

DUKE.
Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports; but the
best is, he lives not in them.

LUCIO.
Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do. He’s a better woodman
than thou tak’st him for.

DUKE.
Well, you’ll answer this one day. Fare ye well.

LUCIO.
Nay, tarry, I’ll go along with thee. I can tell thee pretty tales of
the Duke.

DUKE.
You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true; if not
true, none were enough.

LUCIO.
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

DUKE.
Did you such a thing?

LUCIO.
Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it. They would else have
married me to the rotten medlar.

DUKE.
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.

LUCIO.
By my troth, I’ll go with thee to the lane’s end. If bawdy talk offend
you, we’ll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I
shall stick.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A room in Angelo’s house.

Enter Angelo and Escalus.

ESCALUS.
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

ANGELO.
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much like to
madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted. And why meet him at the
gates and redeliver our authorities there?

ESCALUS.
I guess not.

ANGELO.
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if
any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in
the street?

ESCALUS.
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of complaints, and to
deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to
stand against us.

ANGELO.
Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed.
Betimes i’ th’ morn I’ll call you at your house.
Give notice to such men of sort and suit
As are to meet him.

ESCALUS.
I shall, sir. Fare you well.

[_Exit._]

ANGELO.
Good night.
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflowered maid;
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no,
For my authority bears so credent bulk
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
Might in the times to come have ta’en revenge
By so receiving a dishonoured life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived.
Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.

[_Exit._]

SCENE V. Fields without the town.

Enter Duke, in his own habit, and Friar Peter.

DUKE.
These letters at fit time deliver me.
The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius’ house,
And tell him where I stay. Give the like notice
To Valencius, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate.
But send me Flavius first.

FRIAR PETER.
It shall be speeded well.

[_Exit Friar Peter._]

Enter Varrius.

DUKE.
I thank thee, Varrius, thou hast made good haste.
Come, we will walk. There’s other of our friends
Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Street near the city gate.

Enter Isabella and Mariana.

ISABELLA.
To speak so indirectly I am loath;
I would say the truth, but to accuse him so
That is your part; yet I am advised to do it,
He says, to veil full purpose.

MARIANA.
Be ruled by him.

ISABELLA.
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange, for ’tis a physic
That’s bitter to sweet end.

MARIANA.
I would Friar Peter—

Enter Friar Peter.

ISABELLA.
O, peace, the friar is come.

FRIAR PETER.
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded.
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The Duke is entering. Therefore hence, away.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. A public place near the city gate.


Enter at several doors Duke, Varrius, Lords; Angelo, Escalus, Lucio,
Provost, Officers and Citizens.

DUKE.
My very worthy cousin, fairly met.
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

ANGELO and ESCALUS.
Happy return be to your royal grace!

DUKE.
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
Such goodness of your justice that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Forerunning more requital.

ANGELO.
You make my bonds still greater.

DUKE.
O, your desert speaks loud, and I should wrong it
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
When it deserves with characters of brass
A forted residence ’gainst the tooth of time
And rasure of oblivion. Give me your hand
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favours that keep within.—Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand.
And good supporters are you.

Enter Friar Peter and Isabella.

FRIAR PETER.
Now is your time. Speak loud, and kneel before him.

ISABELLA.
Justice, O royal Duke! Vail your regard
Upon a wronged—I would fain have said, a maid.
O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other object
Till you have heard me in my true complaint,
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!

DUKE.
Relate your wrongs. In what? By whom? Be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice.
Reveal yourself to him.

ISABELLA.
O worthy Duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil.
Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!

ANGELO.
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm.
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
Cut off by course of justice.

ISABELLA.
By course of justice!

ANGELO.
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.

ISABELLA.
Most strange, but yet most truly will I speak.
That Angelo’s forsworn, is it not strange?
That Angelo’s a murderer, is’t not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
Is it not strange and strange?

DUKE.
Nay, it is ten times strange.

ISABELLA.
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange.
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To th’ end of reckoning.

DUKE.
Away with her. Poor soul,
She speaks this in th’ infirmity of sense.

ISABELLA.
O Prince, I conjure thee, as thou believ’st
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not with that opinion
That I am touched with madness. Make not impossible
That which but seems unlike. ’Tis not impossible
But one, the wicked’st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal Prince,
If he be less, he’s nothing; but he’s more,
Had I more name for badness.

DUKE.
By mine honesty,
If she be mad, as I believe no other,
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e’er I heard in madness.

ISABELLA.
O gracious Duke,
Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
For inequality; but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.

DUKE.
Many that are not mad
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?

ISABELLA.
I am the sister of one Claudio,
Condemned upon the act of fornication
To lose his head; condemned by Angelo.
I, in probation of a sisterhood,
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
As then the messenger.

LUCIO.
That’s I, an’t like your Grace.
I came to her from Claudio and desired her
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
For her poor brother’s pardon.

ISABELLA.
That’s he, indeed.

DUKE.
You were not bid to speak.

LUCIO.
No, my good lord,
Nor wished to hold my peace.

DUKE.
I wish you now, then;
Pray you take note of it; and when you have
A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
Be perfect.

LUCIO.
I warrant your honour.

DUKE.
The warrant’s for yourself. Take heed to it.

ISABELLA.
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale.

LUCIO.
Right.

DUKE.
It may be right, but you are i’ the wrong
To speak before your time.—Proceed.

ISABELLA.
I went
To this pernicious caitiff deputy.

DUKE.
That’s somewhat madly spoken.

ISABELLA.
Pardon it;
The phrase is to the matter.

DUKE.
Mended again. The matter; proceed.

ISABELLA.
In brief, to set the needless process by:
How I persuaded, how I prayed and kneeled,
How he refelled me, and how I replied—
For this was of much length—the vile conclusion
I now begin with grief and shame to utter.
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother’s head.

DUKE.
This is most likely!

ISABELLA.
O, that it were as like as it is true!

DUKE.
By heaven, fond wretch, thou know’st not what thou speak’st,
Or else thou art suborned against his honour
In hateful practice. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,
He would have weighed thy brother by himself,
And not have cut him off. Someone hath set you on.
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou cam’st here to complain.

ISABELLA.
And is this all?
Then, O you blessed ministers above,
Keep me in patience, and with ripened time
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
In countenance! Heaven shield your Grace from woe,
As I, thus wronged, hence unbelieved go.

DUKE.
I know you’d fain be gone. An officer!
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.
Who knew of your intent and coming hither?

ISABELLA.
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

[_Exeunt Officer with Isabella._]

DUKE.
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?

LUCIO.
My lord, I know him. ’Tis a meddling friar.
I do not like the man. Had he been lay, my lord,
For certain words he spake against your Grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.

DUKE.
Words against me? This’s a good friar, belike.
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

LUCIO.
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
I saw them at the prison. A saucy friar,
A very scurvy fellow.

FRIAR PETER.
Blessed be your royal Grace!
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused. First hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
As she from one ungot.

DUKE.
We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

FRIAR PETER.
I know him for a man divine and holy,
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he’s reported by this gentleman;
And, on my trust, a man that never yet
Did, as he vouches, misreport your Grace.

LUCIO.
My lord, most villainously; believe it.

FRIAR PETER.
Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended ’gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false; and what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear
Whensoever he’s convented. First, for this woman,
To justify this worthy nobleman,
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she herself confess it.

DUKE.
Good friar, let’s hear it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Give us some seats.—Come, cousin Angelo,
In this I’ll be impartial. Be you judge
Of your own cause.

Enter Mariana, veiled.

Is this the witness, friar?
First let her show her face, and after speak.

MARIANA.
Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.

DUKE.
What, are you married?

MARIANA.
No, my lord.

DUKE.
Are you a maid?

MARIANA.
No, my lord.

DUKE.
A widow, then?

MARIANA.
Neither, my lord.

DUKE.
Why, you are nothing then, neither maid, widow, nor wife?

LUCIO.
My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid, widow,
nor wife.

DUKE.
Silence that fellow. I would he had some cause to prattle for himself.

LUCIO.
Well, my lord.

MARIANA.
My lord, I do confess I ne’er was married,
And I confess besides, I am no maid.
I have known my husband; yet my husband
Knows not that ever he knew me.

LUCIO.
He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.

DUKE.
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too.

LUCIO.
Well, my lord.

DUKE.
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.

MARIANA.
Now I come to’t, my lord.
She that accuses him of fornication
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him, my lord, with such a time
When I’ll depose I had him in mine arms
With all th’ effect of love.

ANGELO.
Charges she more than me?

MARIANA.
Not that I know.

DUKE.
No? You say your husband.

MARIANA.
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne’er knew my body,
But knows, he thinks, that he knows Isabel’s.

ANGELO.
This is a strange abuse. Let’s see thy face.

MARIANA.
My husband bids me; now I will unmask. [_Unveiling_.]
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Which once thou swor’st was worth the looking on.
This is the hand which, with a vowed contract,
Was fast belocked in thine. This is the body
That took away the match from Isabel
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her imagined person.

DUKE.
Know you this woman?

LUCIO.
Carnally, she says.

DUKE.
Sirrah, no more.

LUCIO.
Enough, my lord.

ANGELO.
My lord, I must confess I know this woman;
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition; but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity. Since which time of five years
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
Upon my faith and honour.

MARIANA.
Noble Prince,
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this man’s wife as strongly
As words could make up vows. And, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone, in’s garden-house,
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
Or else for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument!

ANGELO.
I did but smile till now.
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice.
My patience here is touched. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
To find this practice out.

DUKE.
Ay, with my heart;
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that’s gone, think’st thou thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit,
That’s sealed in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence ’tis derived.
There is another friar that set them on;
Let him be sent for.

FRIAR PETER.
Would he were here, my lord; for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint.
Your Provost knows the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him.

DUKE.
Go, do it instantly.

[_Exit Provost._]

And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best
In any chastisement. I for a while
Will leave you; but stir not you till you have
Well determined upon these slanderers.

ESCALUS.
My lord, we’ll do it throughly.

[_Exit Duke._]

Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar Lodowick to be a
dishonest person?

LUCIO.
_Cucullus non facit monachum_, honest in nothing but in his clothes,
and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the Duke.

ESCALUS.
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come, and enforce them
against him. We shall find this friar a notable fellow.

LUCIO.
As any in Vienna, on my word.

ESCALUS.
Call that same Isabel here once again. I would speak with her.

[_Exit an Attendant._]

Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you shall see how I’ll
handle her.

LUCIO.
Not better than he, by her own report.

ESCALUS.
Say you?

LUCIO.
Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would sooner
confess; perchance, publicly, she’ll be ashamed.

Enter at several doors Duke as a friar, Provost and Isabella with
Officers.

ESCALUS.
I will go darkly to work with her.

LUCIO.
That’s the way; for women are light at midnight.

ESCALUS.
[_To Isabella_.] Come on, mistress, here’s a gentlewoman denies all
that you have said.

LUCIO.
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the Provost.

ESCALUS.
In very good time. Speak not you to him till we call upon you.

LUCIO.
Mum.

ESCALUS.
Come, sir, did you set these women on to slander Lord Angelo? They have
confessed you did.

DUKE.
’Tis false.

ESCALUS.
How! Know you where you are?

DUKE.
Respect to your great place; and let the devil
Be sometime honoured for his burning throne.
Where is the Duke? ’Tis he should hear me speak.

ESCALUS.
The Duke’s in us; and we will hear you speak.
Look you speak justly.

DUKE.
Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The Duke’s unjust
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain’s mouth
Which here you come to accuse.

LUCIO.
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.

ESCALUS.
Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
Is’t not enough thou hast suborned these women
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain? And then to glance from him
To th’ Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
Take him hence! To th’ rack with him! We’ll touse you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What! Unjust?

DUKE.
Be not so hot. The Duke
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own. His subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o’errun the stew. Laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber’s shop,
As much in mock as mark.

ESCALUS.
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!

ANGELO.
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?

LUCIO.
’Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman Baldpate.
Do you know me?

DUKE.
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at the
prison, in the absence of the Duke.

LUCIO.
O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?

DUKE.
Most notedly, sir.

LUCIO.
Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and a coward,
as you then reported him to be?

DUKE.
You must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that my report. You
indeed spoke so of him, and much more, much worse.

LUCIO.
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for thy
speeches?

DUKE.
I protest I love the Duke as I love myself.

ANGELO.
Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses!

ESCALUS.
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with him to prison!
Where is the provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts enough upon
him. Let him speak no more. Away with those giglets too, and with the
other confederate companion!

[_The Provost lays hands on the Duke._]

DUKE.
Stay, sir, stay a while.

ANGELO.
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

LUCIO.
Come, sir, come, sir, come, sir. Foh, sir! Why, you bald-pated lying
rascal! You must be hooded, must you? Show your knave’s visage, with a
pox to you! Show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour! Will’t
not off?

[_Pulls off the friar’s hood and discovers the Duke._]

DUKE.
Thou art the first knave that e’er mad’st a duke.
First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.
[_To Lucio_.] Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
Must have a word anon.—Lay hold on him.

LUCIO.
This may prove worse than hanging.

DUKE.
[_To Escalus_.] What you have spoke I pardon. Sit you down.
We’ll borrow place of him. [_To Angelo_.] Sir, by your leave.
Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
Rely upon it till my tale be heard,
And hold no longer out.

ANGELO.
O my dread lord,
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your Grace, like power divine,
Hath looked upon my passes. Then, good Prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession.
Immediate sentence then, and sequent death
Is all the grace I beg.

DUKE.
Come hither, Mariana.
Say, wast thou e’er contracted to this woman?

ANGELO.
I was, my lord.

DUKE.
Go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
Return him here again.—Go with him, Provost.

[_Exeunt Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter and Provost._]

ESCALUS.
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour
Than at the strangeness of it.

DUKE.
Come hither, Isabel.
Your friar is now your prince. As I was then
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still
Attorneyed at your service.

ISABELLA.
O, give me pardon,
That I, your vassal, have employed and pained
Your unknown sovereignty.

DUKE.
You are pardoned, Isabel.
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother’s death, I know, sits at your heart,
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brained my purpose. But peace be with him.
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother.

ISABELLA.
I do, my lord.

Enter Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter and Provost.

DUKE.
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wronged
Your well-defended honour, you must pardon
For Mariana’s sake. But as he adjudged your brother,
Being criminal in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach
Thereon dependent, for your brother’s life,
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
“An Angelo for Claudio, death for death.”
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and measure still for measure.
Then, Angelo, thy fault’s thus manifested,
Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stooped to death, and with like haste.
Away with him.

MARIANA.
O my most gracious lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband.

DUKE.
It is your husband mocked you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
I thought your marriage fit. Else imputation,
For that he knew you, might reproach your life,
And choke your good to come. For his possessions,
Although by confiscation they are ours,
We do instate and widow you with all
To buy you a better husband.

MARIANA.
O my dear lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.

DUKE.
Never crave him; we are definitive.

MARIANA.
[_Kneeling_.] Gentle my liege—

DUKE.
You do but lose your labour.
Away with him to death. [_To Lucio_.] Now, sir, to you.

MARIANA.
O my good lord.—Sweet Isabel, take my part;
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
I’ll lend you all my life to do you service.

DUKE.
Against all sense you do importune her.
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother’s ghost his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.

MARIANA.
Isabel,
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
Hold up your hands, say nothing. I’ll speak all.
They say best men are moulded out of faults,
And, for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad. So may my husband.
O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?

DUKE.
He dies for Claudio’s death.

ISABELLA.
[_Kneeling_.] Most bounteous sir,
Look, if it please you, on this man condemned
As if my brother lived. I partly think
A due sincerity governed his deeds
Till he did look on me. Since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died.
For Angelo,
His act did not o’ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perished by the way. Thoughts are no subjects;
Intents but merely thoughts.

MARIANA.
Merely, my lord.

DUKE.
Your suit’s unprofitable. Stand up, I say.
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?

PROVOST.
It was commanded so.

DUKE.
Had you a special warrant for the deed?

PROVOST.
No, my good lord, it was by private message.

DUKE.
For which I do discharge you of your office.
Give up your keys.

PROVOST.
Pardon me, noble lord.
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
Yet did repent me after more advice.
For testimony whereof, one in the prison
That should by private order else have died,
I have reserved alive.

DUKE.
What’s he?

PROVOST.
His name is Barnardine.

DUKE.
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Go fetch him hither, let me look upon him.

[_Exit Provost._]

ESCALUS.
I am sorry one so learned and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
And lack of tempered judgement afterward.

ANGELO.
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure,
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
’Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

Enter Provost with Barnardine, Claudio (muffled) and Juliet.

DUKE.
Which is that Barnardine?

PROVOST.
This, my lord.

DUKE.
There was a friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squar’st thy life according. Thou’rt condemned;
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
I leave him to your hand.—What muffled fellow’s that?

PROVOST.
This is another prisoner that I saved,
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
As like almost to Claudio as himself.

[_Unmuffles Claudio._]

DUKE.
[_To Isabella_.] If he be like your brother, for his sake
Is he pardoned; and for your lovely sake,
Give me your hand and say you will be mine.
He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
By this Lord Angelo perceives he’s safe;
Methinks I see a quick’ning in his eye.
Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.
Look that you love your wife, her worth worth yours.
I find an apt remission in myself.
And yet here’s one in place I cannot pardon.
[_To Lucio_.] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
One all of luxury, an ass, a madman.
Wherein have I so deserved of you
That you extol me thus?

LUCIO.
Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick. If you will hang
me for it, you may, but I had rather it would please you I might be
whipped.

DUKE.
Whipped first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow,
As I have heard him swear himself there’s one
Whom he begot with child—let her appear,
And he shall marry her. The nuptial finished,
Let him be whipped and hanged.

LUCIO.
I beseech your Highness, do not marry me to a whore. Your highness said
even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not recompense me in
making me a cuckold.

DUKE.
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits.—Take him to prison,
And see our pleasure herein executed.

LUCIO.
Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.

DUKE.
Slandering a prince deserves it.

[_Exeunt Officers with Lucio._]

She, Claudio, that you wronged, look you restore.
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo.
I have confessed her, and I know her virtue.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness;
There’s more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks, Provost, for thy care and secrecy;
We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio’s.
Th’ offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good;
Whereto if you’ll a willing ear incline,
What’s mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
So, bring us to our palace, where we’ll show
What’s yet behind that’s meet you all should know.

[_Exeunt._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE ***




cover




OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare




Contents

 ACT I
 Scene I. Venice. A street
 Scene II. Venice. Another street
 Scene III. Venice. A council chamber

 ACT II
 Scene I. A seaport in Cyprus. A Platform
 Scene II. A street
 Scene III. A Hall in the Castle

 ACT III
 Scene I. Cyprus. Before the Castle
 Scene II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle
 Scene III. Cyprus. The Garden of the Castle
 Scene IV. Cyprus. Before the Castle

 ACT IV
 Scene I. Cyprus. Before the Castle
 Scene II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle
 Scene III. Cyprus. Another Room in the Castle

 ACT V
 Scene I. Cyprus. A Street
 Scene II. Cyprus. A Bedchamber in the castle




Dramatis Personæ

DUKE OF VENICE
BRABANTIO, a Senator of Venice and Desdemona’s father
Other Senators
GRATIANO, Brother to Brabantio
LODOVICO, Kinsman to Brabantio
OTHELLO, a noble Moor in the service of Venice
CASSIO, his Lieutenant
IAGO, his Ancient
MONTANO, Othello’s predecessor in the government of Cyprus
RODERIGO, a Venetian Gentleman
CLOWN, Servant to Othello

DESDEMONA, Daughter to Brabantio and Wife to Othello
EMILIA, Wife to Iago
BIANCA, Mistress to Cassio

Officers, Gentlemen, Messenger, Musicians, Herald, Sailor, Attendants,
&c.

SCENE: The First Act in Venice; during the rest of the Play at a
Seaport in Cyprus.




ACT I

SCENE I. Venice. A street.


Enter Roderigo and Iago.

RODERIGO.
Tush, never tell me, I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse,
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.

IAGO.
’Sblood, but you will not hear me.
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Abhor me.

RODERIGO.
Thou told’st me, thou didst hold him in thy hate.

IAGO.
Despise me if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capp’d to him; and by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them, with a bombast circumstance,
Horribly stuff’d with epithets of war:
And in conclusion,
Nonsuits my mediators: for “Certes,” says he,
“I have already chose my officer.”
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
A fellow almost damn’d in a fair wife,
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster, unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the toged consuls can propose
As masterly as he: mere prattle without practice
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election,
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds,
Christian and heathen, must be belee’d and calm’d
By debitor and creditor, this counter-caster,
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
And I, God bless the mark, his Moorship’s ancient.

RODERIGO.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

IAGO.
Why, there’s no remedy. ’Tis the curse of service,
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to the first. Now sir, be judge yourself
Whether I in any just term am affin’d
To love the Moor.

RODERIGO.
I would not follow him, then.

IAGO.
O, sir, content you.
I follow him to serve my turn upon him:
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly follow’d. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time, much like his master’s ass,
For nought but provender, and when he’s old, cashier’d.
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who, trimm’d in forms, and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them, and when they have lin’d their coats,
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but myself.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so for my peculiar end.
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In complement extern, ’tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.

RODERIGO.
What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe,
If he can carry’t thus!

IAGO.
Call up her father,
Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies: though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such changes of vexation on’t,
As it may lose some color.

RODERIGO.
Here is her father’s house, I’ll call aloud.

IAGO.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous cities.

RODERIGO.
What ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!

IAGO.
Awake! what ho, Brabantio! Thieves, thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
Thieves, thieves!

Brabantio appears above at a window.

BRABANTIO.
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?

RODERIGO.
Signior, is all your family within?

IAGO.
Are your doors locked?

BRABANTIO.
Why, wherefore ask you this?

IAGO.
Zounds, sir, you’re robb’d, for shame put on your gown,
Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise,
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you:
Arise, I say.

BRABANTIO.
What, have you lost your wits?

RODERIGO.
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?

BRABANTIO.
Not I. What are you?

RODERIGO.
My name is Roderigo.

BRABANTIO.
The worser welcome.
I have charg’d thee not to haunt about my doors;
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
My daughter is not for thee; and now in madness,
Being full of supper and distempering draughts,
Upon malicious bravery, dost thou come
To start my quiet.

RODERIGO.
Sir, sir, sir,—

BRABANTIO.
But thou must needs be sure
My spirit and my place have in them power
To make this bitter to thee.

RODERIGO.
Patience, good sir.

BRABANTIO.
What tell’st thou me of robbing?
This is Venice. My house is not a grange.

RODERIGO.
Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul I come to you.

IAGO.
Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God if the devil
bid you. Because we come to do you service, and you think we are
ruffians, you’ll have your daughter cover’d with a Barbary horse;
you’ll have your nephews neigh to you; you’ll have coursers for cousins
and gennets for germans.

BRABANTIO.
What profane wretch art thou?

IAGO.
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are
now making the beast with two backs.

BRABANTIO.
Thou art a villain.

IAGO.
You are a senator.

BRABANTIO.
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.

RODERIGO.
Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you,
If ’t be your pleasure, and most wise consent,
(As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o’ the night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard,
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor:
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.
But if you know not this, my manners tell me,
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.
Your daughter (if you have not given her leave)
I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself:
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Let loose on me the justice of the state
For thus deluding you.

BRABANTIO.
Strike on the tinder, ho!
Give me a taper! Call up all my people!
This accident is not unlike my dream,
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light!

[_Exit from above._]

IAGO.
Farewell; for I must leave you:
It seems not meet nor wholesome to my place
To be produc’d, as if I stay I shall,
Against the Moor. For I do know the state,
However this may gall him with some check,
Cannot with safety cast him, for he’s embark’d
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
Which even now stand in act, that, for their souls,
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag and sign of love,
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him,
Lead to the Sagittary the raised search,
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.

[_Exit._]

Enter Brabantio with Servants and torches.

BRABANTIO.
It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what’s to come of my despised time,
Is naught but bitterness. Now Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her? (O unhappy girl!)
With the Moor, say’st thou? (Who would be a father!)
How didst thou know ’twas she? (O, she deceives me
Past thought.) What said she to you? Get more tapers,
Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?

RODERIGO.
Truly I think they are.

BRABANTIO.
O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters’ minds
By what you see them act. Is there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing?

RODERIGO.
Yes, sir, I have indeed.

BRABANTIO.
Call up my brother. O, would you had had her!
Some one way, some another. Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?

RODERIGO.
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard, and go along with me.

BRABANTIO.
Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call,
I may command at most. Get weapons, ho!
And raise some special officers of night.
On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Venice. Another street.

Enter Othello, Iago and Attendants with torches.

IAGO.
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o’ the conscience
To do no contriv’d murder; I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service: nine or ten times
I had thought to have yerk’d him here under the ribs.

OTHELLO.
’Tis better as it is.

IAGO.
Nay, but he prated,
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
Against your honour,
That with the little godliness I have,
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir,
Are you fast married? Be assur’d of this,
That the magnifico is much belov’d
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the duke’s; he will divorce you,
Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
The law (with all his might to enforce it on)
Will give him cable.

OTHELLO.
Let him do his spite;
My services, which I have done the signiory,
Shall out-tongue his complaints. ’Tis yet to know,—
Which, when I know that boasting is an honour,
I shall promulgate,—I fetch my life and being
From men of royal siege. And my demerits
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reach’d. For know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my unhoused free condition
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea’s worth. But look, what lights come yond?

IAGO.
Those are the raised father and his friends:
You were best go in.

OTHELLO.
Not I; I must be found.
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?

IAGO.
By Janus, I think no.

Enter Cassio and Officers with torches.

OTHELLO.
The servants of the duke and my lieutenant.
The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
What is the news?

CASSIO.
The duke does greet you, general,
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance
Even on the instant.

OTHELLO.
What is the matter, think you?

CASSIO.
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine.
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another’s heels;
And many of the consuls, rais’d and met,
Are at the duke’s already. You have been hotly call’d for,
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.

OTHELLO.
’Tis well I am found by you.
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And go with you.

[_Exit._]

CASSIO.
Ancient, what makes he here?

IAGO.
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack:
If it prove lawful prize, he’s made forever.

CASSIO.
I do not understand.

IAGO.
He’s married.

CASSIO.
To who?

Enter Othello.

IAGO.
Marry to—Come, captain, will you go?

OTHELLO.
Have with you.

CASSIO.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.

Enter Brabantio, Roderigo and Officers with torches and weapons.

IAGO.
It is Brabantio. General, be advis’d,
He comes to bad intent.

OTHELLO.
Holla, stand there!

RODERIGO.
Signior, it is the Moor.

BRABANTIO.
Down with him, thief!

[_They draw on both sides._]

IAGO.
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.

OTHELLO.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.
Good signior, you shall more command with years
Than with your weapons.

BRABANTIO.
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow’d my daughter?
Damn’d as thou art, thou hast enchanted her,
For I’ll refer me to all things of sense,
(If she in chains of magic were not bound)
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage, that she shunn’d
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,
Would ever have, to incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou—to fear, not to delight.
Judge me the world, if ’tis not gross in sense,
That thou hast practis’d on her with foul charms,
Abus’d her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weakens motion. I’ll have’t disputed on;
’Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
For an abuser of the world, a practiser
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.—
Lay hold upon him, if he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.

OTHELLO.
Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining and the rest:
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter. Where will you that I go
To answer this your charge?

BRABANTIO.
To prison, till fit time
Of law and course of direct session
Call thee to answer.

OTHELLO.
What if I do obey?
How may the duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him?

OFFICER.
’Tis true, most worthy signior,
The duke’s in council, and your noble self,
I am sure is sent for.

BRABANTIO.
How? The duke in council?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine’s not an idle cause. The duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own.
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Venice. A council chamber.

The Duke and Senators sitting at a table; Officers attending.

DUKE.
There is no composition in these news
That gives them credit.

FIRST SENATOR.
Indeed, they are disproportion’d;
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.

DUKE.
And mine a hundred and forty.

SECOND SENATOR
And mine two hundred:
But though they jump not on a just account,
(As in these cases, where the aim reports,
’Tis oft with difference,) yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

DUKE.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgement:
I do not so secure me in the error,
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense.

SAILOR.
[_Within._] What, ho! what, ho! what, ho!

OFFICER.
A messenger from the galleys.

Enter Sailor.

DUKE.
Now,—what’s the business?

SAILOR.
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the state
By Signior Angelo.

DUKE.
How say you by this change?

FIRST SENATOR.
This cannot be
By no assay of reason. ’Tis a pageant
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk;
And let ourselves again but understand
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks the abilities
That Rhodes is dress’d in. If we make thought of this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskilful
To leave that latest which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,
To wake and wage a danger profitless.

DUKE.
Nay, in all confidence, he’s not for Rhodes.

OFFICER.
Here is more news.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.

FIRST SENATOR.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?

MESSENGER.
Of thirty sail, and now they do re-stem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.

DUKE.
’Tis certain, then, for Cyprus.
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?

FIRST SENATOR.
He’s now in Florence.

DUKE.
Write from us to him; post-post-haste dispatch.

FIRST SENATOR.
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.

Enter Brabantio, Othello, Iago, Roderigo and Officers.

DUKE.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
[_To Brabantio._] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior,
We lack’d your counsel and your help tonight.

BRABANTIO.
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me.
Neither my place, nor aught I heard of business
Hath rais’d me from my bed, nor doth the general care
Take hold on me; for my particular grief
Is of so flood-gate and o’erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
And it is still itself.

DUKE.
Why, what’s the matter?

BRABANTIO.
My daughter! O, my daughter!

DUKE and SENATORS.
Dead?

BRABANTIO.
Ay, to me.
She is abused, stol’n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so preposterously to err,
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,
Sans witchcraft could not.

DUKE.
Whoe’er he be, that in this foul proceeding,
Hath thus beguil’d your daughter of herself,
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,
After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action.

BRABANTIO.
Humbly I thank your grace.
Here is the man, this Moor, whom now it seems
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought.

ALL.
We are very sorry for ’t.

DUKE.
[_To Othello._] What, in your own part, can you say to this?

BRABANTIO.
Nothing, but this is so.

OTHELLO.
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approv’d good masters:
That I have ta’en away this old man’s daughter,
It is most true; true, I have married her.
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little bless’d with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years’ pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have us’d
Their dearest action in the tented field,
And little of this great world can I speak,
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,
I will a round unvarnish’d tale deliver
Of my whole course of love: what drugs, what charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic,
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his daughter.

BRABANTIO.
A maiden never bold:
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
Blush’d at herself; and she, in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, everything,
To fall in love with what she fear’d to look on!
It is judgement maim’d and most imperfect
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell,
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again,
That with some mixtures powerful o’er the blood,
Or with some dram conjur’d to this effect,
He wrought upon her.

DUKE.
To vouch this is no proof;
Without more wider and more overt test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.

FIRST SENATOR.
But, Othello, speak:
Did you by indirect and forced courses
Subdue and poison this young maid’s affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth?

OTHELLO.
I do beseech you,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
And let her speak of me before her father.
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.

DUKE.
Fetch Desdemona hither.

OTHELLO.
Ancient, conduct them, you best know the place.

[_Exeunt Iago and Attendants._]

And till she come, as truly as to heaven
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your grave ears I’ll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love,
And she in mine.

DUKE.
Say it, Othello.

OTHELLO.
Her father lov’d me, oft invited me,
Still question’d me the story of my life,
From year to year—the battles, sieges, fortunes,
That I have pass’d.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To the very moment that he bade me tell it,
Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
Of moving accidents by flood and field;
Of hair-breadth scapes i’ th’ imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the insolent foe,
And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence,
And portance in my traveler’s history,
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak,—such was the process;
And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear
Would Desdemona seriously incline.
But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
She’d come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not intentively. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffer’d. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She swore, in faith, ’twas strange, ’twas passing strange;
’Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful.
She wish’d she had not heard it, yet she wish’d
That heaven had made her such a man: she thank’d me,
And bade me, if I had a friend that lov’d her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake:
She lov’d me for the dangers I had pass’d,
And I lov’d her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have us’d.
Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.

Enter  Desdemona, Iago and Attendants.

DUKE.
I think this tale would win my daughter too.
Good Brabantio,
Take up this mangled matter at the best.
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands.

BRABANTIO.
I pray you hear her speak.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man!—Come hither, gentle mistress:
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience?

DESDEMONA.
My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty:
To you I am bound for life and education.
My life and education both do learn me
How to respect you. You are the lord of duty,
I am hitherto your daughter: but here’s my husband.
And so much duty as my mother show’d
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Due to the Moor my lord.

BRABANTIO.
God be with you! I have done.
Please it your grace, on to the state affairs.
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.—
Come hither, Moor:
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee.—For your sake, jewel,
I am glad at soul I have no other child,
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them.—I have done, my lord.

DUKE.
Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence,
Which as a grise or step may help these lovers
Into your favour.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mockery makes.
The robb’d that smiles steals something from the thief;
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

BRABANTIO.
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We lose it not so long as we can smile;
He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal:
But words are words; I never yet did hear
That the bruis’d heart was pierced through the ear.
I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.

DUKE.
The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello, the
fortitude of the place is best known to you. And though we have there a
substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign
mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you: you must
therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with
this more stubborn and boisterous expedition.

OTHELLO.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down: I do agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardness, and do undertake
This present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state,
I crave fit disposition for my wife,
Due reference of place and exhibition,
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.

DUKE.
If you please,
Be’t at her father’s.

BRABANTIO.
I’ll not have it so.

OTHELLO.
Nor I.

DESDEMONA.
Nor I. I would not there reside,
To put my father in impatient thoughts,
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear,
And let me find a charter in your voice
T’ assist my simpleness.

DUKE.
What would you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
That I did love the Moor to live with him,
My downright violence and storm of fortunes
May trumpet to the world: my heart’s subdued
Even to the very quality of my lord.
I saw Othello’s visage in his mind,
And to his honours and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for which I love him are bereft me,
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

OTHELLO.
Let her have your voice.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite,
Nor to comply with heat, the young affects
In me defunct, and proper satisfaction,
But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
And heaven defend your good souls that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
For she is with me. No, when light-wing’d toys
Of feather’d Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and offic’d instruments,
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
And all indign and base adversities
Make head against my estimation.

DUKE.
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going. The affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it.

FIRST SENATOR.
You must away tonight.

OTHELLO.
With all my heart.

DUKE.
At nine i’ the morning here we’ll meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind,
And he shall our commission bring to you,
With such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.

OTHELLO.
So please your grace, my ancient,
A man he is of honesty and trust,
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good grace shall think
To be sent after me.

DUKE.
Let it be so.
Good night to everyone. [_To Brabantio._] And, noble signior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

FIRST SENATOR.
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.

BRABANTIO.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:
She has deceiv’d her father, and may thee.

[_Exeunt Duke, Senators, Officers, &c._]

OTHELLO.
My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.—
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters, and direction,
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.

[_Exeunt Othello and Desdemona._]

RODERIGO.
Iago—

IAGO.
What sayst thou, noble heart?

RODERIGO.
What will I do, thinkest thou?

IAGO.
Why, go to bed and sleep.

RODERIGO.
I will incontinently drown myself.

IAGO.
If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly gentleman!

RODERIGO.
It is silliness to live, when to live is torment; and then have we a
prescription to die when death is our physician.

IAGO.
O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years,
and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury, I never
found man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say I would drown
myself for the love of a guinea-hen, I would change my humanity with a
baboon.

RODERIGO.
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not
in my virtue to amend it.

IAGO.
Virtue! a fig! ’Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies
are gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners. So that if we will
plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it
with one gender of herbs or distract it with many, either to have it
sterile with idleness or manured with industry, why, the power and
corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. If the balance of our
lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the
blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most preposterous
conclusions. But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal
stings, our unbitted lusts; whereof I take this, that you call love, to
be a sect, or scion.

RODERIGO.
It cannot be.

IAGO.
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. Come, be
a man. Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies. I have professed me
thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of
perdurable toughness; I could never better stead thee than now. Put
money in thy purse; follow thou the wars; defeat thy favour with an
usurped beard; I say, put money in thy purse. It cannot be that
Desdemona should long continue her love to the Moor,—put money in thy
purse,—nor he his to her. It was a violent commencement, and thou shalt
see an answerable sequestration—put but money in thy purse. These Moors
are changeable in their wills. Fill thy purse with money. The food that
to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as acerb
as the coloquintida. She must change for youth. When she is sated with
his body, she will find the error of her choice. She must have change,
she must. Therefore put money in thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn
thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money
thou canst. If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian
and a supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the
tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her; therefore make money. A pox of
drowning thyself! It is clean out of the way: seek thou rather to be
hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without her.

RODERIGO.
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes if I depend on the issue?

IAGO.
Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I
retell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted;
thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against
him: if thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a
sport. There are many events in the womb of time which will be
delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more of this
tomorrow. Adieu.

RODERIGO.
Where shall we meet i’ the morning?

IAGO.
At my lodging.

RODERIGO.
I’ll be with thee betimes.

IAGO.
Go to, farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
What say you?

IAGO.
No more of drowning, do you hear?

RODERIGO.
I am changed. I’ll sell all my land.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.
For I mine own gain’d knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such a snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets
He has done my office. I know not if ’t be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now,
To get his place, and to plume up my will
In double knavery. How, how? Let’s see.
After some time, to abuse Othello’s ear
That he is too familiar with his wife.
He hath a person and a smooth dispose,
To be suspected, fram’d to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be led by the nose
As asses are.
I have’t. It is engender’d. Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light.

[_Exit._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A seaport in Cyprus. A Platform.


Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.

MONTANO.
What from the cape can you discern at sea?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Nothing at all, it is a high-wrought flood.
I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the main
Descry a sail.

MONTANO.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land.
A fuller blast ne’er shook our battlements.
If it hath ruffian’d so upon the sea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind-shak’d surge, with high and monstrous main,
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear,
And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole;
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafed flood.

MONTANO.
If that the Turkish fleet
Be not enshelter’d, and embay’d, they are drown’d.
It is impossible to bear it out.

Enter a third Gentleman.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
News, lads! Our wars are done.
The desperate tempest hath so bang’d the Turks
That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
On most part of their fleet.

MONTANO.
How? Is this true?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
The ship is here put in,
A Veronessa; Michael Cassio,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.

MONTANO.
I am glad on’t. ’Tis a worthy governor.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,
And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest.

MONTANO.
Pray heavens he be;
For I have serv’d him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let’s to the sea-side, ho!
As well to see the vessel that’s come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
An indistinct regard.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Come, let’s do so;
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance.

Enter Cassio.

CASSIO.
Thanks you, the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defence against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.

MONTANO.
Is he well shipp’d?

CASSIO.
His bark is stoutly timber’d, and his pilot
Of very expert and approv’d allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.

[_Within._] A sail, a sail, a sail!

Enter a Messenger.

CASSIO.
What noise?

MESSENGER.
The town is empty; on the brow o’ the sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry “A sail!”

CASSIO.
My hopes do shape him for the governor.

[_A shot._]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.
Our friends at least.

CASSIO.
I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who ’tis that is arriv’d.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I shall.

[_Exit._]

MONTANO.
But, good lieutenant, is your general wiv’d?

CASSIO.
Most fortunately: he hath achiev’d a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in the essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.

Enter second Gentleman.

How now? Who has put in?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
’Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.

CASSIO.
He has had most favourable and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The gutter’d rocks, and congregated sands,
Traitors ensteep’d to clog the guiltless keel,
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.

MONTANO.
What is she?

CASSIO.
She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago;
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A se’nnight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms,
Give renew’d fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort!

Enter Desdemona, Iago, Roderigo, and Emilia.

O, behold,
The riches of the ship is come on shore!
Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Enwheel thee round!

DESDEMONA.
I thank you, valiant Cassio.
What tidings can you tell me of my lord?

CASSIO.
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he’s well, and will be shortly here.

DESDEMONA.
O, but I fear—How lost you company?

[_Within._] A sail, a sail!

CASSIO.
The great contention of the sea and skies
Parted our fellowship. But, hark! a sail.

[_Guns within._]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
They give their greeting to the citadel.
This likewise is a friend.

CASSIO.
See for the news.

[_Exit Gentleman._]

Good ancient, you are welcome. [_To Emilia._] Welcome, mistress.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners; ’tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.

[_Kissing her._]

IAGO.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, she has no speech.

IAGO.
In faith, too much.
I find it still when I have list to sleep.
Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.

EMILIA.
You have little cause to say so.

IAGO.
Come on, come on; you are pictures out of doors,
Bells in your parlours, wild-cats in your kitchens,
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.

DESDEMONA.
O, fie upon thee, slanderer!

IAGO.
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

EMILIA.
You shall not write my praise.

IAGO.
No, let me not.

DESDEMONA.
What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?

IAGO.
O gentle lady, do not put me to’t,
For I am nothing if not critical.

DESDEMONA.
Come on, assay.—There’s one gone to the harbour?

IAGO.
Ay, madam.

DESDEMONA.
I am not merry, but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.—
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?

IAGO.
I am about it, but indeed, my invention
Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze,
It plucks out brains and all: but my Muse labours,
And thus she is deliver’d.
If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
The one’s for use, the other useth it.

DESDEMONA.
Well prais’d! How if she be black and witty?

IAGO.
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She’ll find a white that shall her blackness fit.

DESDEMONA.
Worse and worse.

EMILIA.
How if fair and foolish?

IAGO.
She never yet was foolish that was fair,
For even her folly help’d her to an heir.

DESDEMONA.
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i’ the alehouse. What
miserable praise hast thou for her that’s foul and foolish?

IAGO.
There’s none so foul and foolish thereunto,
But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.

DESDEMONA.
O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what praise
couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the
authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice
itself?

IAGO.
She that was ever fair and never proud,
Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
Never lack’d gold and yet went never gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said, “Now I may”;
She that, being anger’d, her revenge being nigh,
Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly;
She that in wisdom never was so frail
To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail;
She that could think and ne’er disclose her mind,
See suitors following and not look behind;
She was a wight, if ever such wight were—

DESDEMONA.
To do what?

IAGO.
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.

DESDEMONA.
O most lame and impotent conclusion!—Do not learn of him, Emilia,
though he be thy husband.—How say you, Cassio? is he not a most profane
and liberal counsellor?

CASSIO.
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier than in
the scholar.

IAGO.
[_Aside._] He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said, whisper. With as
little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile
upon her, do. I will gyve thee in thine own courtship. You say true,
’tis so, indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your
lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers
so oft, which now again you are most apt to play the sir in. Very good;
well kissed, an excellent courtesy! ’Tis so, indeed. Yet again your
fingers to your lips? Would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!

[_Trumpets within._]

The Moor! I know his trumpet.

CASSIO.
’Tis truly so.

DESDEMONA.
Let’s meet him, and receive him.

CASSIO.
Lo, where he comes!

Enter Othello and Attendants.

OTHELLO.
O my fair warrior!

DESDEMONA.
My dear Othello!

OTHELLO.
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul’s joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have waken’d death!
And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus-high, and duck again as low
As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die,
’Twere now to be most happy, for I fear
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate.

DESDEMONA.
The heavens forbid
But that our loves and comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow!

OTHELLO.
Amen to that, sweet powers!
I cannot speak enough of this content.
It stops me here; it is too much of joy:
And this, and this, the greatest discords be [_They kiss._]
That e’er our hearts shall make!

IAGO.
[_Aside._] O, you are well tun’d now,
But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.

OTHELLO.
Come, let us to the castle.—
News, friends, our wars are done, the Turks are drown’d.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
Honey, you shall be well desir’d in Cyprus;
I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts.—I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
Bring thou the master to the citadel;
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect.—Come, Desdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.

[_Exeunt Othello, Desdemona and Attendants._]

IAGO.
Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. Come hither. If thou be’st
valiant—as, they say, base men being in love have then a nobility in
their natures more than is native to them—list me. The lieutenant
tonight watches on the court of guard: first, I must tell thee this:
Desdemona is directly in love with him.

RODERIGO.
With him? Why, ’tis not possible.

IAGO.
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what
violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging, and telling her
fantastical lies. And will she love him still for prating? Let not thy
discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed. And what delight shall
she have to look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act
of sport, there should be, again to inflame it and to give satiety a
fresh appetite, loveliness in favour, sympathy in years, manners, and
beauties; all which the Moor is defective in: now, for want of these
required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself abused,
begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor, very nature
will instruct her in it, and compel her to some second choice. Now sir,
this granted (as it is a most pregnant and unforced position) who
stands so eminently in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? a
knave very voluble; no further conscionable than in putting on the mere
form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt
and most hidden loose affection? Why, none, why, none! A slipper and
subtle knave, a finder out of occasions; that has an eye can stamp and
counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself: a
devilish knave! Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all
those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. A
pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.

RODERIGO.
I cannot believe that in her, she is full of most blessed condition.

IAGO.
Blest fig’s end! the wine she drinks is made of grapes: if she had been
blessed, she would never have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst
thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?

RODERIGO.
Yes, that I did. But that was but courtesy.

IAGO.
Lechery, by this hand. An index and obscure prologue to the history of
lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their lips that their
breaths embrac’d together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo! When these
mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main
exercise, the incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by
me. I have brought you from Venice. Watch you tonight. For the command,
I’ll lay’t upon you. Cassio knows you not. I’ll not be far from you. Do
you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or
tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which
the time shall more favourably minister.

RODERIGO.
Well.

IAGO.
Sir, he is rash, and very sudden in choler, and haply with his
truncheon may strike at you: provoke him that he may, for even out of
that will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall
come into no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So
shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I shall
then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed,
without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.

RODERIGO.
I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.

IAGO.
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel: I must fetch his
necessaries ashore. Farewell.

RODERIGO.
Adieu.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
That she loves him, ’tis apt, and of great credit:
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature;
And, I dare think, he’ll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too,
Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
I stand accountant for as great a sin)
But partly led to diet my revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leap’d into my seat. The thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am even’d with him, wife for wife,
Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
(For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too)
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
For making him egregiously an ass
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. ’Tis here, but yet confus’d.
Knavery’s plain face is never seen till us’d.

[_Exit._]

SCENE II. A street.

Enter Othello’s Herald with a proclamation.

HERALD.
It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant general, that upon
certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the
Turkish fleet, every man put himself into triumph: some to dance, some
to make bonfires, each man to what sport and revels his addition leads
him. For besides these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his
nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offices are
open, and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of
five till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus
and our noble general Othello!

[_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Hall in the Castle.

Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio and Attendants.

OTHELLO.
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
Let’s teach ourselves that honourable stop,
Not to outsport discretion.

CASSIO.
Iago hath direction what to do.
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to’t.

OTHELLO.
Iago is most honest.
Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you. [_To Desdemona._] Come, my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you.—
Good night.

[_Exeunt Othello, Desdemona and Attendants._]

Enter Iago.

CASSIO.
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.

IAGO.
Not this hour, lieutenant. ’Tis not yet ten o’ th’ clock. Our general
cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona; who let us not
therefore blame: he hath not yet made wanton the night with her; and
she is sport for Jove.

CASSIO.
She’s a most exquisite lady.

IAGO.
And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.

CASSIO.
Indeed, she is a most fresh and delicate creature.

IAGO.
What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.

CASSIO.
An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.

IAGO.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarm to love?

CASSIO.
She is indeed perfection.

IAGO.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of
wine; and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain
have a measure to the health of black Othello.

CASSIO.
Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for
drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.

IAGO.
O, they are our friends; but one cup: I’ll drink for you.

CASSIO.
I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily qualified too,
and behold, what innovation it makes here: I am unfortunate in the
infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.

IAGO.
What, man! ’Tis a night of revels. The gallants desire it.

CASSIO.
Where are they?

IAGO.
Here at the door. I pray you, call them in.

CASSIO.
I’ll do’t; but it dislikes me.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
He’ll be as full of quarrel and offence
As my young mistress’ dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo,
Whom love hath turn’d almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath tonight carous’d
Potations pottle-deep; and he’s to watch:
Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
That hold their honours in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I tonight fluster’d with flowing cups,
And they watch too. Now, ’mongst this flock of drunkards,
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle. But here they come:
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

Enter Cassio, Montano and Gentlemen; followed by Servant with wine.

CASSIO.
’Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.

MONTANO.
Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am a soldier.

IAGO.
Some wine, ho!
[_Sings._]

    _And let me the cannikin clink, clink,
    And let me the cannikin clink, clink:
        A soldier’s a man,
        O, man’s life’s but a span,
    Why then let a soldier drink._

Some wine, boys!

CASSIO.
’Fore God, an excellent song.

IAGO.
I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting:
your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander,—drink, ho!—are
nothing to your English.

CASSIO.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?

IAGO.
Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead drunk; he sweats not
to overthrow your Almain; he gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next
pottle can be filled.

CASSIO.
To the health of our general!

MONTANO.
I am for it, lieutenant; and I’ll do you justice.

IAGO.
O sweet England!

[_Sings._]

    _King Stephen was a worthy peer,
        His breeches cost him but a crown;
    He held them sixpence all too dear,
        With that he call’d the tailor lown.
    He was a wight of high renown,
        And thou art but of low degree:
    ’Tis pride that pulls the country down,
        Then take thine auld cloak about thee._

Some wine, ho!

CASSIO.
’Fore God, this is a more exquisite song than the other.

IAGO.
Will you hear ’t again?

CASSIO.
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things.
Well, God’s above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be
souls must not be saved.

IAGO.
It’s true, good lieutenant.

CASSIO.
For mine own part, no offence to the general, nor any man of quality, I
hope to be saved.

IAGO.
And so do I too, lieutenant.

CASSIO.
Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant is to be saved
before the ancient. Let’s have no more of this; let’s to our affairs.
Forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let’s look to our business. Do not
think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient, this is my right
hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough,
and I speak well enough.

ALL.
Excellent well.

CASSIO.
Why, very well then. You must not think, then, that I am drunk.

[_Exit._]

MONTANO.
To the platform, masters. Come, let’s set the watch.

IAGO.
You see this fellow that is gone before,
He is a soldier fit to stand by Cæsar
And give direction: and do but see his vice,
’Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as th’ other. ’Tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.

MONTANO.
But is he often thus?

IAGO.
’Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:
He’ll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle.

MONTANO.
It were well
The general were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?

Enter Roderigo.

IAGO.
[_Aside to him._] How now, Roderigo?
I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.

[_Exit Roderigo._]

MONTANO.
And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an ingraft infirmity:
It were an honest action to say so
To the Moor.

IAGO.
Not I, for this fair island.
I do love Cassio well and would do much
To cure him of this evil. But, hark! What noise?

[_Cry within_: “Help! help!”]

Enter Cassio, driving in Roderigo.

CASSIO.
Zounds, you rogue, you rascal!

MONTANO.
What’s the matter, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
A knave teach me my duty! I’ll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.

RODERIGO.
Beat me?

CASSIO.
Dost thou prate, rogue?

[_Striking Roderigo._]

MONTANO.
Nay, good lieutenant;
I pray you, sir, hold your hand.

CASSIO.
Let me go, sir,
Or I’ll knock you o’er the mazard.

MONTANO.
Come, come, you’re drunk.

CASSIO.
Drunk?

[_They fight._]

IAGO.
[_Aside to Roderigo._] Away, I say! Go out and cry a mutiny.

[_Exit Roderigo._]

Nay, good lieutenant, God’s will, gentlemen.
Help, ho!—Lieutenant,—sir,—Montano,—sir:—
Help, masters! Here’s a goodly watch indeed!

[_A bell rings._]

Who’s that which rings the bell?—Diablo, ho!
The town will rise. God’s will, lieutenant, hold,
You will be sham’d forever.

Enter Othello and Attendants.

OTHELLO.
What is the matter here?

MONTANO.
Zounds, I bleed still, I am hurt to the death.

OTHELLO.
Hold, for your lives!

IAGO.
Hold, ho! lieutenant,—sir,—Montano,—gentlemen,—
Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?
Hold! The general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame!

OTHELLO.
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?
Are we turn’d Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
Speak, who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.

IAGO.
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
Devesting them for bed; and then, but now,
As if some planet had unwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds;
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!

OTHELLO.
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?

CASSIO.
I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.

OTHELLO.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted, and your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure: what’s the matter,
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.

MONTANO.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
Your officer, Iago, can inform you,
While I spare speech, which something now offends me,
Of all that I do know; nor know I aught
By me that’s said or done amiss this night,
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.

OTHELLO.
Now, by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
And passion, having my best judgement collied,
Assays to lead the way. Zounds, if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on,
And he that is approv’d in this offence,
Though he had twinn’d with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,
Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
’Tis monstrous. Iago, who began’t?

MONTANO.
If partially affin’d, or leagu’d in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.

IAGO.
Touch me not so near.
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio.
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general:
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determin’d sword,
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamour (as it so fell out)
The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose: and I return’d the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
I ne’er might say before. When I came back,
(For this was brief) I found them close together,
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But men are men; the best sometimes forget;
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, receiv’d
From him that fled some strange indignity,
Which patience could not pass.

OTHELLO.
I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be officer of mine.

Enter Desdemona, attended.

Look, if my gentle love be not rais’d up!
I’ll make thee an example.

DESDEMONA.
What’s the matter?

OTHELLO.
All’s well now, sweeting; come away to bed.
Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon.
Lead him off.


[_Montano is led off._]

Iago, look with care about the town,
And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.
Come, Desdemona: ’tis the soldiers’ life
To have their balmy slumbers wak’d with strife.

[_Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio._]

IAGO.
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
Ay, past all surgery.

IAGO.
Marry, Heaven forbid!

CASSIO.
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my reputation! I
have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. My
reputation, Iago, my reputation!

IAGO.
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound;
there is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle
and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without
deserving. You have lost no reputation at all, unless you repute
yourself such a loser. What, man, there are ways to recover the general
again: you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy
than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenceless dog to
affright an imperious lion: sue to him again, and he’s yours.

CASSIO.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander
with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk? and
speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse fustian with
one’s own shadow? O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name
to be known by, let us call thee devil!

IAGO.
What was he that you followed with your sword? What had he done to you?

CASSIO.
I know not.

IAGO.
Is’t possible?

CASSIO.
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a quarrel, but
nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an enemy in their mouths
to steal away their brains! That we should with joy, pleasance, revel,
and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!

IAGO.
Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus recovered?

CASSIO.
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil wrath.
One unperfectness shows me another, to make me frankly despise myself.

IAGO.
Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the
condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish this had not
befallen; but since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.

CASSIO.
I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me I am a drunkard!
Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To
be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast! O
strange! Every inordinate cup is unbless’d, and the ingredient is a
devil.

IAGO.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used.
Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I
love you.

CASSIO.
I have well approved it, sir.—I drunk!

IAGO.
You, or any man living, may be drunk at a time, man. I’ll tell you what
you shall do. Our general’s wife is now the general; I may say so in
this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the
contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. Confess
yourself freely to her. Importune her help to put you in your place
again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition,
she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is
requested. This broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to
splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of
your love shall grow stronger than it was before.

CASSIO.
You advise me well.

IAGO.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

CASSIO.
I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech the
virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me; I am desperate of my fortunes
if they check me here.

IAGO.
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must to the watch.

CASSIO.
Good night, honest Iago.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
And what’s he then, that says I play the villain?
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit. She’s fram’d as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor, were’t to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
His soul is so enfetter’d to her love
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then, a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now: for whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear,
That she repeals him for her body’s lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.

Enter Roderigo.

How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that hunts, but one
that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent, I have been tonight
exceedingly well cudgelled; and I think the issue will be, I shall have
so much experience for my pains, and so, with no money at all and a
little more wit, return again to Venice.

IAGO.
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know’st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier’d Cassio;
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
Content thyself awhile. By the mass, ’tis morning;
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter.
Nay, get thee gone.

[_Exit Roderigo._]

Two things are to be done,
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.
I’ll set her on;
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that’s the way.
Dull not device by coldness and delay.

[_Exit._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle.


Enter Cassio and some Musicians.

CASSIO.
Masters, play here, I will content your pains,
Something that’s brief; and bid “Good morrow, general.”

[_Music._]

Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
Why, masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they speak i’
the nose thus?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
How, sir, how?

CLOWN.
Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Ay, marry, are they, sir.

CLOWN.
O, thereby hangs a tail.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

CLOWN.
Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But, masters, here’s
money for you: and the general so likes your music, that he desires
you, for love’s sake, to make no more noise with it.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Well, sir, we will not.

CLOWN.
If you have any music that may not be heard, to’t again. But, as they
say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
We have none such, sir.

CLOWN.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll away. Go, vanish into air,
away!

[_Exeunt Musicians._]

CASSIO.
Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?

CLOWN.
No, I hear not your honest friend. I hear you.

CASSIO.
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There’s a poor piece of gold for thee:
if the gentlewoman that attends the general’s wife be stirring, tell
her there’s one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt
thou do this?

CLOWN.
She is stirring, sir; if she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify
unto her.

CASSIO.
Do, good my friend.

[_Exit Clown._]

Enter Iago.

In happy time, Iago.

IAGO.
You have not been a-bed, then?

CASSIO.
Why, no. The day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her
Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.

IAGO.
I’ll send her to you presently,
And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.

CASSIO.
I humbly thank you for’t.

[_Exit Iago._]

I never knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.

Enter Emilia.

EMILIA.
Good morrow, good lieutenant; I am sorry
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
The general and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.

CASSIO.
Yet, I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.

EMILIA.
Pray you, come in.
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.

CASSIO.
I am much bound to you.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle.

Enter Othello, Iago and Gentlemen.

OTHELLO.
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
And by him do my duties to the senate.
That done, I will be walking on the works,
Repair there to me.

IAGO.
Well, my good lord, I’ll do’t.

OTHELLO.
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see’t?

GENTLEMEN.
We’ll wait upon your lordship.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Cyprus. The Garden of the Castle.

Enter Desdemona, Cassio and Emilia.

DESDEMONA.
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.

EMILIA.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
As if the cause were his.

DESDEMONA.
O, that’s an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.

CASSIO.
Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He’s never anything but your true servant.

DESDEMONA.
I know’t. I thank you. You do love my lord.
You have known him long; and be you well assur’d
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance.

CASSIO.
Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent, and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.

DESDEMONA.
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I’ll perform it
To the last article. My lord shall never rest,
I’ll watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
I’ll intermingle everything he does
With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.

Enter Othello and Iago.

EMILIA.
Madam, here comes my lord.

CASSIO.
Madam, I’ll take my leave.

DESDEMONA.
Why, stay, and hear me speak.

CASSIO.
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.

DESDEMONA.
Well, do your discretion.

[_Exit Cassio._]

IAGO.
Ha, I like not that.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou say?

IAGO.
Nothing, my lord; or if—I know not what.

OTHELLO.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

IAGO.
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it,
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing you coming.

OTHELLO.
I do believe ’twas he.

DESDEMONA.
How now, my lord?
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

OTHELLO.
Who is’t you mean?

DESDEMONA.
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgement in an honest face.
I prithee call him back.

OTHELLO.
Went he hence now?

DESDEMONA.
Ay, sooth; so humbled
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.

OTHELLO.
Not now, sweet Desdemon, some other time.

DESDEMONA.
But shall’t be shortly?

OTHELLO.
The sooner, sweet, for you.

DESDEMONA.
Shall’t be tonight at supper?

OTHELLO.
No, not tonight.

DESDEMONA.
Tomorrow dinner then?

OTHELLO.
I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.

DESDEMONA.
Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noon, or night; on Wednesday morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. In faith, he’s penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason,
(Save that, they say, the wars must make examples
Out of their best) is not almost a fault
To incur a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul,
What you would ask me, that I should deny,
Or stand so mammering on. What? Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta’en your part, to have so much to do
To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much.

OTHELLO.
Prithee no more. Let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing.

DESDEMONA.
Why, this is not a boon;
’Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person: nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.

OTHELLO.
I will deny thee nothing.
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.

DESDEMONA.
Shall I deny you? No, farewell, my lord.

OTHELLO.
Farewell, my Desdemona. I’ll come to thee straight.

DESDEMONA.
Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you.
Whate’er you be, I am obedient.

[_Exit with Emilia._]

OTHELLO.
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
But I do love thee! And when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.

IAGO.
My noble lord,—

OTHELLO.
What dost thou say, Iago?

IAGO.
Did Michael Cassio, when you woo’d my lady,
Know of your love?

OTHELLO.
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?

IAGO.
But for a satisfaction of my thought.
No further harm.

OTHELLO.
Why of thy thought, Iago?

IAGO.
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

OTHELLO.
O yes, and went between us very oft.

IAGO.
Indeed?

OTHELLO.
Indeed? Ay, indeed. Discern’st thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?

IAGO.
Honest, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Honest? ay, honest.

IAGO.
My lord, for aught I know.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou think?

IAGO.
Think, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Think, my lord? By heaven, he echoes me,
As if there were some monster in his thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something.
I heard thee say even now, thou lik’st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst, “Indeed?”
And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit: if thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.

IAGO.
My lord, you know I love you.

OTHELLO.
I think thou dost;
And for I know thou’rt full of love and honesty
And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that’s just,
They’re close dilations, working from the heart,
That passion cannot rule.

IAGO.
For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.

OTHELLO.
I think so too.

IAGO.
Men should be what they seem;
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!

OTHELLO.
Certain, men should be what they seem.

IAGO.
Why then, I think Cassio’s an honest man.

OTHELLO.
Nay, yet there’s more in this:
I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.

IAGO.
Good my lord, pardon me.
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false:
As where’s that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has a breast so pure
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit
With meditations lawful?

OTHELLO.
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think’st him wrong’d and mak’st his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.

IAGO.
I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
As, I confess, it is my nature’s plague
To spy into abuses, and of my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not,—that your wisdom
From one that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice; nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou mean?

IAGO.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash. ’Tis something, nothing;
’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands.
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I’ll know thy thoughts.

IAGO.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst ’tis in my custody.

OTHELLO.
Ha?

IAGO.
O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;
It is the green-ey’d monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damned minutes tells he o’er
Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!

OTHELLO.
O misery!

IAGO.
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!

OTHELLO.
Why, why is this?
Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No. To be once in doubt
Is once to be resolv’d: exchange me for a goat
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. ’Tis not to make me jealous,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well;
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous:
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
I’ll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this:
Away at once with love or jealousy!

IAGO.
I am glad of it, for now I shall have reason
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit: therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure.
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abus’d. Look to’t.
I know our country disposition well;
In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands. Their best conscience
Is not to leave undone, but keep unknown.

OTHELLO.
Dost thou say so?

IAGO.
She did deceive her father, marrying you;
And when she seem’d to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.

OTHELLO.
And so she did.

IAGO.
Why, go to then.
She that so young could give out such a seeming,
To seal her father’s eyes up close as oak,
He thought ’twas witchcraft. But I am much to blame.
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.

OTHELLO.
I am bound to thee for ever.

IAGO.
I see this hath a little dash’d your spirits.

OTHELLO.
Not a jot, not a jot.

IAGO.
Trust me, I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from my love. But I do see you’re mov’d.
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.

OTHELLO.
I will not.

IAGO.
Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success
Which my thoughts aim’d not. Cassio’s my worthy friend.
My lord, I see you’re mov’d.

OTHELLO.
No, not much mov’d.
I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.

IAGO.
Long live she so! And long live you to think so!

OTHELLO.
And yet, how nature erring from itself—

IAGO.
Ay, there’s the point. As, to be bold with you,
Not to affect many proposed matches,
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends;
Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural.
But pardon me: I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,
May fall to match you with her country forms,
And happily repent.

OTHELLO.
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.

IAGO.
[_Going._] My lord, I take my leave.

OTHELLO.
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.

IAGO.
[_Returning._] My lord, I would I might entreat your honour
To scan this thing no further. Leave it to time:
Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,
For sure he fills it up with great ability,
Yet if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means.
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity,
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears
(As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.

OTHELLO.
Fear not my government.

IAGO.
I once more take my leave.

[_Exit._]

OTHELLO.
This fellow’s of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
I’d whistle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declin’d
Into the vale of years,—yet that’s not much—
She’s gone, I am abus’d, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others’ uses. Yet, ’tis the plague of great ones,
Prerogativ’d are they less than the base,
’Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Desdemona comes.
If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
I’ll not believe’t.

Enter Desdemona and Emilia.

DESDEMONA.
How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.

OTHELLO.
I am to blame.

DESDEMONA.
Why do you speak so faintly?
Are you not well?

OTHELLO.
I have a pain upon my forehead here.

DESDEMONA.
Faith, that’s with watching, ’twill away again;
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well.

OTHELLO.
Your napkin is too little;

[_He puts the handkerchief from him, and she drops it._]

Let it alone. Come, I’ll go in with you.

DESDEMONA.
I am very sorry that you are not well.

[_Exeunt Othello and Desdemona._]

EMILIA.
I am glad I have found this napkin;
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Woo’d me to steal it. But she so loves the token,
For he conjur’d her she should ever keep it,
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I’ll have the work ta’en out,
And give’t Iago. What he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I,
I nothing but to please his fantasy.

Enter Iago.

IAGO.
How now? What do you here alone?

EMILIA.
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.

IAGO.
A thing for me? It is a common thing—

EMILIA.
Ha?

IAGO.
To have a foolish wife.

EMILIA.
O, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same handkerchief?

IAGO.
What handkerchief?

EMILIA.
What handkerchief?
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.

IAGO.
Hast stol’n it from her?

EMILIA.
No, faith, she let it drop by negligence,
And, to the advantage, I being here, took ’t up.
Look, here it is.

IAGO.
A good wench, give it me.

EMILIA.
What will you do with’t, that you have been so earnest
To have me filch it?

IAGO.
[_Snatching it._] Why, what’s that to you?

EMILIA.
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give ’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run mad
When she shall lack it.

IAGO.
Be not acknown on’t, I have use for it.
Go, leave me.

[_Exit Emilia._]

I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ. This may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood
Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so.

Enter Othello.

Look, where he comes. Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou ow’dst yesterday.

OTHELLO.
Ha! ha! false to me?

IAGO.
Why, how now, general? No more of that.

OTHELLO.
Avaunt! be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
I swear ’tis better to be much abus’d
Than but to know’t a little.

IAGO.
How now, my lord?

OTHELLO.
What sense had I of her stol’n hours of lust?
I saw’t not, thought it not, it harm’d not me.
I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips.
He that is robb’d, not wanting what is stol’n,
Let him not know’t, and he’s not robb’d at all.

IAGO.
I am sorry to hear this.

OTHELLO.
I had been happy if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, for ever
Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troops and the big wars
That make ambition virtue! O, farewell,
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And, O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
The immortal Jove’s dread clamours counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone!

IAGO.
Is’t possible, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof,
Or, by the worth of man’s eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my wak’d wrath.

IAGO.
Is’t come to this?

OTHELLO.
Make me to see’t, or at the least so prove it,
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!

IAGO.
My noble lord,—

OTHELLO.
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more. Abandon all remorse;
On horror’s head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amaz’d;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.

IAGO.
O grace! O heaven defend me!
Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?
God be wi’ you. Take mine office.—O wretched fool,
That liv’st to make thine honesty a vice!
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
To be direct and honest is not safe.
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I’ll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.

OTHELLO.
Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.

IAGO.
I should be wise; for honesty’s a fool,
And loses that it works for.

OTHELLO.
By the world,
I think my wife be honest, and think she is not.
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not.
I’ll have some proof: her name, that was as fresh
As Dian’s visage, is now begrim’d and black
As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,
Poison or fire, or suffocating streams,
I’ll not endure ’t. Would I were satisfied!

IAGO.
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion.
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?

OTHELLO.
Would? Nay, I will.

IAGO.
And may; but how? How satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,
Behold her topp’d?

OTHELLO.
Death and damnation! O!

IAGO.
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances,
Which lead directly to the door of truth,
Will give you satisfaction, you may have’t.

OTHELLO.
Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.

IAGO.
I do not like the office,
But sith I am enter’d in this cause so far,
Prick’d to ’t by foolish honesty and love,
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep.
There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs.
One of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say, “Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves;”
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry “O sweet creature!” and then kiss me hard,
As if he pluck’d up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my lips, then laid his leg
Over my thigh, and sigh’d and kiss’d, and then
Cried “Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!”

OTHELLO.
O monstrous! monstrous!

IAGO.
Nay, this was but his dream.

OTHELLO.
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
’Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

IAGO.
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.

OTHELLO.
I’ll tear her all to pieces.

IAGO.
Nay, but be wise. Yet we see nothing done,
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wife’s hand?

OTHELLO.
I gave her such a one, ’twas my first gift.

IAGO.
I know not that: but such a handkerchief
(I am sure it was your wife’s) did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

OTHELLO.
If it be that,—

IAGO.
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.

OTHELLO.
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge!
Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago;
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
’Tis gone.
Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For ’tis of aspics’ tongues!

IAGO.
Yet be content.

OTHELLO.
O, blood, Iago, blood!

IAGO.
Patience, I say. Your mind perhaps may change.

OTHELLO.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Ne’er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont;
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall ne’er look back, ne’er ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up. Now by yond marble heaven,
In the due reverence of a sacred vow [_Kneels._]
I here engage my words.

IAGO.
Do not rise yet. [_Kneels._]
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wrong’d Othello’s service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.

[_They rise._]

OTHELLO.
I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to ’t.
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassio’s not alive.

IAGO.
My friend is dead. ’Tis done at your request.
But let her live.

OTHELLO.
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her, damn her!
Come, go with me apart, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.

IAGO.
I am your own for ever.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Cyprus. Before the Castle.

Enter Desdemona, Emilia and Clown.

DESDEMONA.
Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?

CLOWN.
I dare not say he lies anywhere.

DESDEMONA.
Why, man?

CLOWN.
He’s a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies is stabbing.

DESDEMONA.
Go to. Where lodges he?

CLOWN.
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.

DESDEMONA.
Can anything be made of this?

CLOWN.
I know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a lodging, and say he
lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.

DESDEMONA.
Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report?

CLOWN.
I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions and by them
answer.

DESDEMONA.
Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my lord on his
behalf, and hope all will be well.

CLOWN.
To do this is within the compass of man’s wit, and therefore I will
attempt the doing it.

[_Exit._]

DESDEMONA.
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?

EMILIA.
I know not, madam.

DESDEMONA.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.

EMILIA.
Is he not jealous?

DESDEMONA.
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humours from him.

EMILIA.
Look, where he comes.

Enter Othello.

DESDEMONA.
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be call’d to him. How is’t with you, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Well, my good lady. [_Aside._] O, hardness to dissemble!
How do you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
Well, my good lord.

OTHELLO.
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.

DESDEMONA.
It yet hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.

OTHELLO.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For here’s a young and sweating devil here
That commonly rebels. ’Tis a good hand,
A frank one.

DESDEMONA.
You may indeed say so,
For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.

OTHELLO.
A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands,
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

DESDEMONA.
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.

OTHELLO.
What promise, chuck?

DESDEMONA.
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

OTHELLO.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.
Lend me thy handkerchief.

DESDEMONA.
Here, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That which I gave you.

DESDEMONA.
I have it not about me.

OTHELLO.
Not?

DESDEMONA.
No, faith, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That is a fault. That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give.
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
’Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Entirely to her love. But if she lost it,
Or made a gift of it, my father’s eye
Should hold her loathed, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies: she, dying, gave it me,
And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on’t,
Make it a darling like your precious eye.
To lose’t or give’t away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.

DESDEMONA.
Is’t possible?

OTHELLO.
’Tis true. There’s magic in the web of it.
A sibyl, that had number’d in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sew’d the work;
The worms were hallow’d that did breed the silk,
And it was dyed in mummy, which the skillful
Conserv’d of maiden’s hearts.

DESDEMONA.
Indeed? Is’t true?

OTHELLO.
Most veritable, therefore look to ’t well.

DESDEMONA.
Then would to God that I had never seen ’t!

OTHELLO.
Ha? wherefore?

DESDEMONA.
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?

OTHELLO.
Is’t lost? is’t gone? speak, is it out of the way?

DESDEMONA.
Heaven bless us!

OTHELLO.
Say you?

DESDEMONA.
It is not lost, but what and if it were?

OTHELLO.
How?

DESDEMONA.
I say it is not lost.

OTHELLO.
Fetch’t, let me see ’t.

DESDEMONA.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit.
Pray you, let Cassio be receiv’d again.

OTHELLO.
Fetch me the handkerchief! My mind misgives.

DESDEMONA.
Come, come.
You’ll never meet a more sufficient man.

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
I pray, talk me of Cassio.

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
Shar’d dangers with you,—

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
In sooth, you are to blame.

OTHELLO.
Away!

[_Exit._]

EMILIA.
Is not this man jealous?

DESDEMONA.
I ne’er saw this before.
Sure there’s some wonder in this handkerchief,
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

EMILIA.
’Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
They are all but stomachs and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
They belch us.

Enter Cassio and Iago.

Look you, Cassio and my husband.

IAGO.
There is no other way; ’tis she must do ’t,
And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.

DESDEMONA.
How now, good Cassio, what’s the news with you?

CASSIO.
Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love,
Whom I, with all the office of my heart,
Entirely honour. I would not be delay’d.
If my offence be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,
Nor purpos’d merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit;
So shall I clothe me in a forc’d content,
And shut myself up in some other course
To fortune’s alms.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,
My advocation is not now in tune;
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favour as in humour alter’d.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.

IAGO.
Is my lord angry?

EMILIA.
He went hence but now,
And certainly in strange unquietness.

IAGO.
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
When it hath blown his ranks into the air
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puff’d his own brother, and can he be angry?
Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
There’s matter in’t indeed if he be angry.

DESDEMONA.
I prithee do so.

[_Exit Iago._]

Something sure of state,
Either from Venice, or some unhatch’d practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases
Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. ’Tis even so.
For let our finger ache, and it indues
Our other healthful members even to that sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was (unhandsome warrior as I am)
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
But now I find I had suborn’d the witness,
And he’s indicted falsely.

EMILIA.
Pray heaven it be state matters, as you think,
And no conception nor no jealous toy
Concerning you.

DESDEMONA.
Alas the day, I never gave him cause!

EMILIA.
But jealous souls will not be answer’d so;
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they are jealous: ’tis a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.

DESDEMONA.
Heaven keep that monster from Othello’s mind!

EMILIA.
Lady, amen.

DESDEMONA.
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout:
If I do find him fit, I’ll move your suit,
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

CASSIO.
I humbly thank your ladyship.

[_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._]

Enter Bianca.

BIANCA.
Save you, friend Cassio!

CASSIO.
What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
I’ faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.

BIANCA.
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights?
Eight score eight hours, and lovers’ absent hours,
More tedious than the dial eight score times?
O weary reckoning!

CASSIO.
Pardon me, Bianca.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been press’d,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,

[_Giving her Desdemona’s handkerchief._]

Take me this work out.

BIANCA.
O Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend.
To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
Is’t come to this? Well, well.

CASSIO.
Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.
No, in good troth, Bianca.

BIANCA.
Why, whose is it?

CASSIO.
I know not neither. I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well. Ere it be demanded,
As like enough it will, I’d have it copied.
Take it, and do ’t, and leave me for this time.

BIANCA.
Leave you, wherefore?

CASSIO.
I do attend here on the general,
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me woman’d.

BIANCA.
Why, I pray you?

CASSIO.
Not that I love you not.

BIANCA.
But that you do not love me.
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say if I shall see you soon at night.

CASSIO.
’Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here. But I’ll see you soon.

BIANCA.
’Tis very good; I must be circumstanc’d.

[_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle.


Enter Othello and Iago.

IAGO.
Will you think so?

OTHELLO.
Think so, Iago?

IAGO.
What,
To kiss in private?

OTHELLO.
An unauthoriz’d kiss.

IAGO.
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

OTHELLO.
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil:
They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.

IAGO.
So they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip.
But if I give my wife a handkerchief—

OTHELLO.
What then?

IAGO.
Why then, ’tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow’t on any man.

OTHELLO.
She is protectress of her honour too.
May she give that?

IAGO.
Her honour is an essence that’s not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not:
But for the handkerchief—

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou said’st (O, it comes o’er my memory,
As doth the raven o’er the infected house,
Boding to all) he had my handkerchief.

IAGO.
Ay, what of that?

OTHELLO.
That’s not so good now.

IAGO.
What
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab.)

OTHELLO.
Hath he said anything?

IAGO.
He hath, my lord, but be you well assur’d,
No more than he’ll unswear.

OTHELLO.
What hath he said?

IAGO.
Faith, that he did—I know not what he did.

OTHELLO.
What? What?

IAGO.
Lie.

OTHELLO.
With her?

IAGO.
With her, on her, what you will.

OTHELLO.
Lie with her! lie on her!—We say lie on her when they belie her.—Lie
with her! that’s fulsome. Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief! To
confess, and be hanged for his labour. First, to be hanged, and then to
confess. I tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself in such
shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not words that shake
me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips. Is’t
possible?—Confess?—handkerchief?—O devil!—

[_Falls in a trance._]

IAGO.
Work on,
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught,
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach. What, ho! my lord!
My lord, I say! Othello!

Enter Cassio.

How now, Cassio!

CASSIO.
What’s the matter?

IAGO.
My lord is fallen into an epilepsy.
This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.

CASSIO.
Rub him about the temples.

IAGO.
No, forbear;
The lethargy must have his quiet course.
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs:
Do you withdraw yourself a little while,
He will recover straight. When he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.

[_Exit Cassio._]

How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?

OTHELLO.
Dost thou mock me?

IAGO.
I mock you? No, by heaven.
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!

OTHELLO.
A horned man’s a monster and a beast.

IAGO.
There’s many a beast, then, in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.

OTHELLO.
Did he confess it?

IAGO.
Good sir, be a man.
Think every bearded fellow that’s but yok’d
May draw with you. There’s millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better.
O, ’tis the spite of hell, the fiend’s arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

OTHELLO.
O, thou art wise, ’tis certain.

IAGO.
Stand you awhile apart,
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here o’erwhelmed with your grief,
(A passion most unsuiting such a man)
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
And laid good ’scuse upon your ecstasy,
Bade him anon return, and here speak with me,
The which he promis’d. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
That dwell in every region of his face;
For I will make him tell the tale anew,
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife:
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.

OTHELLO.
Dost thou hear, Iago?
I will be found most cunning in my patience;
But,—dost thou hear?—most bloody.

IAGO.
That’s not amiss.
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?

[_Othello withdraws._]

Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A housewife that by selling her desires
Buys herself bread and clothes: it is a creature
That dotes on Cassio, (as ’tis the strumpet’s plague
To beguile many and be beguil’d by one.)
He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.

Enter Cassio.

As he shall smile Othello shall go mad,
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behaviour
Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.

IAGO.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on’t.
[_Speaking lower._] Now, if this suit lay in Bianca’s power,
How quickly should you speed!

CASSIO.
Alas, poor caitiff!

OTHELLO.
[_Aside._] Look how he laughs already!

IAGO.
I never knew a woman love man so.

CASSIO.
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i’ faith, she loves me.

OTHELLO.
[_Aside._] Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.

IAGO.
Do you hear, Cassio?

OTHELLO.
Now he importunes him
To tell it o’er. Go to, well said, well said.

IAGO.
She gives it out that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?

CASSIO.
Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
Do you triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?

CASSIO.
I marry her? What? A customer? I prithee, bear some charity to my wit,
do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
So, so, so, so. They laugh that wins.

IAGO.
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.

CASSIO.
Prithee say true.

IAGO.
I am a very villain else.

OTHELLO.
Have you scored me? Well.

CASSIO.
This is the monkey’s own giving out. She is persuaded I will marry her,
out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.

OTHELLO.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.

CASSIO.
She was here even now. She haunts me in every place. I was the other
day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes
the bauble, and falls thus about my neck.

OTHELLO.
Crying, “O dear Cassio!” as it were: his gesture imports it.

CASSIO.
So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so hales and pulls me. Ha, ha,
ha!

OTHELLO.
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. O, I see that nose of
yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.

CASSIO.
Well, I must leave her company.

IAGO.
Before me! look where she comes.

Enter Bianca.

CASSIO.
’Tis such another fitchew! Marry, a perfum’d one.
What do you mean by this haunting of me?

BIANCA.
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same
handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must
take out the work? A likely piece of work, that you should find it in
your chamber and not know who left it there! This is some minx’s token,
and I must take out the work? There, give it your hobby-horse.
Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no work on’t.

CASSIO.
How now, my sweet Bianca? How now, how now?

OTHELLO.
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!

BIANCA.
If you’ll come to supper tonight, you may. If you will not, come when
you are next prepared for.

[_Exit._]

IAGO.
After her, after her.

CASSIO.
Faith, I must; she’ll rail in the street else.

IAGO.
Will you sup there?

CASSIO.
Faith, I intend so.

IAGO.
Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.

CASSIO.
Prithee come, will you?

IAGO.
Go to; say no more.

[_Exit Cassio._]

OTHELLO.
[_Coming forward._] How shall I murder him, Iago?

IAGO.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?

OTHELLO.
O Iago!

IAGO.
And did you see the handkerchief?

OTHELLO.
Was that mine?

IAGO.
Yours, by this hand: and to see how he prizes the foolish woman your
wife! she gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.

OTHELLO.
I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine woman, a fair woman, a
sweet woman!

IAGO.
Nay, you must forget that.

OTHELLO.
Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned tonight, for she shall not
live. No, my heart is turned to stone; I strike it, and it hurts my
hand. O, the world hath not a sweeter creature. She might lie by an
emperor’s side, and command him tasks.

IAGO.
Nay, that’s not your way.

OTHELLO.
Hang her, I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle, an
admirable musician! O, she will sing the savageness out of a bear! Of
so high and plenteous wit and invention!

IAGO.
She’s the worse for all this.

OTHELLO.
O, a thousand, a thousand times: and then of so gentle a condition!

IAGO.
Ay, too gentle.

OTHELLO.
Nay, that’s certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of
it, Iago!

IAGO.
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if
it touch not you, it comes near nobody.

OTHELLO.
I will chop her into messes. Cuckold me!

IAGO.
O, ’tis foul in her.

OTHELLO.
With mine officer!

IAGO.
That’s fouler.

OTHELLO.
Get me some poison, Iago; this night. I’ll not expostulate with her,
lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again. This night, Iago.

IAGO.
Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath
contaminated.

OTHELLO.
Good, good. The justice of it pleases. Very good.

IAGO.
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more by
midnight.

OTHELLO.
Excellent good. [_A trumpet within._] What trumpet is that same?

Enter Lodovico, Desdemona and Attendant.

IAGO.
Something from Venice, sure. ’Tis Lodovico
Come from the duke. See, your wife is with him.

LODOVICO.
Save you, worthy general!

OTHELLO.
With all my heart, sir.

LODOVICO.
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.

[_Gives him a packet._]

OTHELLO.
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

[_Opens the packet and reads._]

DESDEMONA.
And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?

IAGO.
I am very glad to see you, signior.
Welcome to Cyprus.

LODOVICO.
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?

IAGO.
Lives, sir.

DESDEMONA.
Cousin, there’s fall’n between him and my lord
An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.

OTHELLO.
Are you sure of that?

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
[_Reads._] “This fail you not to do, as you will—”

LODOVICO.
He did not call; he’s busy in the paper.
Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?

DESDEMONA.
A most unhappy one. I would do much
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

OTHELLO.
Fire and brimstone!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
Are you wise?

DESDEMONA.
What, is he angry?

LODOVICO.
May be the letter mov’d him;
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.

DESDEMONA.
Trust me, I am glad on’t.

OTHELLO.
Indeed!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
I am glad to see you mad.

DESDEMONA.
Why, sweet Othello?

OTHELLO.
Devil!

[_Striking her._]

DESDEMONA.
I have not deserv’d this.

LODOVICO.
My lord, this would not be believ’d in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw’t: ’tis very much.
Make her amends. She weeps.

OTHELLO.
O devil, devil!
If that the earth could teem with woman’s tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!

DESDEMONA.
I will not stay to offend you.

[_Going._]

LODOVICO.
Truly, an obedient lady.
I do beseech your lordship, call her back.

OTHELLO.
Mistress!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
What would you with her, sir?

LODOVICO.
Who, I, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again. And she can weep, sir, weep;
And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient,
Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears.
Concerning this, sir,—O well-painted passion!
I am commanded home.—Get you away;
I’ll send for you anon.—Sir, I obey the mandate,
And will return to Venice.—Hence, avaunt!

[_Exit Desdemona._]

Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight,
I do entreat that we may sup together.
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!

[_Exit._]

LODOVICO.
Is this the noble Moor, whom our full senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce?

IAGO.
He is much chang’d.

LODOVICO.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?

IAGO.
He’s that he is. I may not breathe my censure
What he might be. If what he might he is not,
I would to heaven he were!

LODOVICO.
What, strike his wife?

IAGO.
Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst!

LODOVICO.
Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood,
And new-create this fault?

IAGO.
Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech: do but go after,
And mark how he continues.

LODOVICO.
I am sorry that I am deceiv’d in him.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle.

Enter Othello and Emilia.

OTHELLO.
You have seen nothing, then?

EMILIA.
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

OTHELLO.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.

EMILIA.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.

OTHELLO.
What, did they never whisper?

EMILIA.
Never, my lord.

OTHELLO.
Nor send you out o’ the way?

EMILIA.
Never.

OTHELLO.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?

EMILIA.
Never, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That’s strange.

EMILIA.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There’s no man happy. The purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.

OTHELLO.
Bid her come hither. Go.

[_Exit Emilia._]

She says enough. Yet she’s a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
A closet lock and key of villainous secrets.
And yet she’ll kneel and pray. I have seen her do ’t.

Enter Desdemona and Emilia.

DESDEMONA.
My lord, what is your will?

OTHELLO.
Pray, chuck, come hither.

DESDEMONA.
What is your pleasure?

OTHELLO.
Let me see your eyes.
Look in my face.

DESDEMONA.
What horrible fancy’s this?

OTHELLO.
[_To Emilia._] Some of your function, mistress,
Leave procreants alone, and shut the door.
Cough, or cry hem, if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery. Nay, dispatch.

[_Exit Emilia._]

DESDEMONA.
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.

OTHELLO.
Why, what art thou?

DESDEMONA.
Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.

OTHELLO.
Come, swear it, damn thyself,
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double-damn’d.
Swear thou art honest.

DESDEMONA.
Heaven doth truly know it.

OTHELLO.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.

DESDEMONA.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?

OTHELLO.
O Desdemona, away! away! away!

DESDEMONA.
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
Why, I have lost him too.

OTHELLO.
Had it pleas’d heaven
To try me with affliction, had they rain’d
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,
Steep’d me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience. But, alas, to make me
A fixed figure for the time of scorn
To point his slow unmoving finger at.
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well:
But there, where I have garner’d up my heart,
Where either I must live or bear no life,
The fountain from the which my current runs,
Or else dries up, to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in!—turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lipp’d cherubin,
Ay, there, look grim as hell!

DESDEMONA.
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.

OTHELLO.
O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair, and smell’st so sweet,
That the sense aches at thee,
Would thou hadst ne’er been born!

DESDEMONA.
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?

OTHELLO.
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write “whore” upon? What committed?
Committed! O thou public commoner!
I should make very forges of my cheeks,
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed!
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
Is hush’d within the hollow mine of earth,
And will not hear it. What committed!
Impudent strumpet!

DESDEMONA.
By heaven, you do me wrong.

OTHELLO.
Are not you a strumpet?

DESDEMONA.
No, as I am a Christian:
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

OTHELLO.
What, not a whore?

DESDEMONA.
No, as I shall be sav’d.

OTHELLO.
Is’t possible?

DESDEMONA.
O, heaven forgive us!

OTHELLO.
I cry you mercy then.
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.—You, mistress,

Enter Emilia.

That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keeps the gate of hell. You, you, ay, you!
We have done our course; there’s money for your pains.
I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel.

[_Exit._]

EMILIA.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?

DESDEMONA.
Faith, half asleep.

EMILIA.
Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?

DESDEMONA.
With who?

EMILIA.
Why, with my lord, madam.

DESDEMONA.
Who is thy lord?

EMILIA.
He that is yours, sweet lady.

DESDEMONA.
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia,
I cannot weep, nor answer have I none
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets, remember,
And call thy husband hither.

EMILIA.
Here’s a change indeed!

[_Exit._]

DESDEMONA.
’Tis meet I should be us’d so, very meet.
How have I been behav’d, that he might stick
The small’st opinion on my least misuse?

Enter Iago and Emilia.

IAGO.
What is your pleasure, madam? How is’t with you?

DESDEMONA.
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.

IAGO.
What’s the matter, lady?

EMILIA.
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhor’d her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her,
As true hearts cannot bear.

DESDEMONA.
Am I that name, Iago?

IAGO.
What name, fair lady?

DESDEMONA.
Such as she says my lord did say I was.

EMILIA.
He call’d her whore: a beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.

IAGO.
Why did he so?

DESDEMONA.
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.

IAGO.
Do not weep, do not weep: alas the day!

EMILIA.
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father, and her country, and her friends,
To be call’d whore? would it not make one weep?

DESDEMONA.
It is my wretched fortune.

IAGO.
Beshrew him for’t!
How comes this trick upon him?

DESDEMONA.
Nay, heaven doth know.

EMILIA.
I will be hang’d, if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devis’d this slander. I’ll be hang’d else.

IAGO.
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.

DESDEMONA.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!

EMILIA.
A halter pardon him, and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company?
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?
The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
O heaven, that such companions thou’dst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world
Even from the east to the west!

IAGO.
Speak within door.

EMILIA.
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
That turn’d your wit the seamy side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

IAGO.
You are a fool. Go to.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him. For by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel.
If e’er my will did trespass ’gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
Delighted them in any other form,
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will, (though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement) love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much;
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say “whore,”
It does abhor me now I speak the word;
To do the act that might the addition earn
Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.

IAGO.
I pray you, be content. ’Tis but his humour.
The business of the state does him offence,
And he does chide with you.

DESDEMONA.
If ’twere no other,—

IAGO.
’Tis but so, I warrant.

[_Trumpets within._]

Hark, how these instruments summon to supper.
The messengers of Venice stay the meat.
Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well.

[_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._]

Enter Roderigo.

How now, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.

IAGO.
What in the contrary?

RODERIGO.
Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it
seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency than suppliest me with
the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor am
I yet persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly
suffered.

IAGO.
Will you hear me, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and performances are no
kin together.

IAGO.
You charge me most unjustly.

RODERIGO.
With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means. The jewels
you have had from me to deliver to Desdemona would half have corrupted
a votarist: you have told me she hath received them, and returned me
expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I
find none.

IAGO.
Well, go to, very well.

RODERIGO.
Very well, go to, I cannot go to, man, nor ’tis not very well. Nay, I
say ’tis very scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.

IAGO.
Very well.

RODERIGO.
I tell you ’tis not very well. I will make myself known to Desdemona.
If she will return me my jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my
unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction
of you.

IAGO.
You have said now.

RODERIGO.
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.

IAGO.
Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee, and even from this instant do
build on thee a better opinion than ever before. Give me thy hand,
Roderigo. Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I
protest, I have dealt most directly in thy affair.

RODERIGO.
It hath not appeared.

IAGO.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without
wit and judgement. But, Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed,
which I have greater reason to believe now than ever,—I mean purpose,
courage, and valour,—this night show it. If thou the next night
following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery
and devise engines for my life.

RODERIGO.
Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?

IAGO.
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in
Othello’s place.

RODERIGO.
Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.

IAGO.
O, no; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away with him the fair
Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident: wherein
none can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.

RODERIGO.
How do you mean “removing” of him?

IAGO.
Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s place: knocking out his
brains.

RODERIGO.
And that you would have me to do?

IAGO.
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with
a harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his
honourable fortune. If you will watch his going thence, which I will
fashion to fall out between twelve and one, you may take him at your
pleasure: I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall
between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. I will
show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself
bound to put it on him. It is now high supper-time, and the night grows
to waste. About it.

RODERIGO.
I will hear further reason for this.

IAGO.
And you shall be satisfied.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Cyprus. Another Room in the Castle.

Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia and Attendants.

LODOVICO.
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

OTHELLO.
O, pardon me; ’twill do me good to walk.

LODOVICO.
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.

DESDEMONA.
Your honour is most welcome.

OTHELLO.
Will you walk, sir?—
O, Desdemona,—

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
Get you to bed on th’ instant, I will be return’d forthwith. Dismiss
your attendant there. Look ’t be done.

DESDEMONA.
I will, my lord.

[_Exeunt Othello, Lodovico and Attendants._]

EMILIA.
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.

DESDEMONA.
He says he will return incontinent,
He hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.

EMILIA.
Dismiss me?

DESDEMONA.
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
We must not now displease him.

EMILIA.
I would you had never seen him!

DESDEMONA.
So would not I. My love doth so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns,—
Prithee, unpin me,—have grace and favour in them.

EMILIA.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.

DESDEMONA.
All’s one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.

EMILIA.
Come, come, you talk.

DESDEMONA.
My mother had a maid call’d Barbary,
She was in love, and he she lov’d prov’d mad
And did forsake her. She had a song of “willow”,
An old thing ’twas, but it express’d her fortune,
And she died singing it. That song tonight
Will not go from my mind. I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee dispatch.

EMILIA.
Shall I go fetch your night-gown?

DESDEMONA.
No, unpin me here.
This Lodovico is a proper man.

EMILIA.
A very handsome man.

DESDEMONA.
He speaks well.

EMILIA.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a
touch of his nether lip.

DESDEMONA.
[_Singing._]
    _The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
        Sing all a green willow.
    Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
        Sing willow, willow, willow.
    The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur’d her moans,
        Sing willow, willow, willow;
    Her salt tears fell from her, and soften’d the stones;—_

Lay by these:—

[_Sings._]
        _Sing willow, willow, willow._

Prithee hie thee. He’ll come anon.

[_Sings._]
    _Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve,—_

Nay, that’s not next. Hark! who is’t that knocks?

EMILIA.
It’s the wind.

DESDEMONA.
[_Sings._]
    _I call’d my love false love; but what said he then?
        Sing willow, willow, willow:
    If I court mo women, you’ll couch with mo men._

So get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?

EMILIA.
’Tis neither here nor there.

DESDEMONA.
I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think,—tell me, Emilia,—
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?

EMILIA.
There be some such, no question.

DESDEMONA.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA.
Why, would not you?

DESDEMONA.
No, by this heavenly light!

EMILIA.
Nor I neither by this heavenly light,
I might do’t as well i’ the dark.

DESDEMONA.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA.
The world’s a huge thing. It is a great price
For a small vice.

DESDEMONA.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.

EMILIA.
In troth, I think I should, and undo’t when I had done. Marry, I would
not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition; but, for the
whole world—why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a
monarch? I should venture purgatory for ’t.

DESDEMONA.
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong for the whole world.

EMILIA.
Why, the wrong is but a wrong i’ the world; and having the world for
your labour, ’tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make
it right.

DESDEMONA.
I do not think there is any such woman.

EMILIA.
Yes, a dozen; and as many to the vantage as would store the world they
played for.
But I do think it is their husbands’ faults
If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite.
Why, we have galls; and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them: they see, and smell
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
I think it doth. Is’t frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well: else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.

DESDEMONA.
Good night, good night. Heaven me such usage send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!

[_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Cyprus. A Street.


Enter Iago and Roderigo.

IAGO.
Here, stand behind this bulk. Straight will he come.
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
Quick, quick, fear nothing; I’ll be at thy elbow.
It makes us, or it mars us, think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.

RODERIGO.
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in ’t.

IAGO.
Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.

[_Retires to a little distance._]

RODERIGO.
I have no great devotion to the deed;
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
’Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword; he dies.

[_Goes to his stand._]

IAGO.
I have rubb’d this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobb’d from him,
As gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril.
No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.

Enter Cassio.

RODERIGO.
I know his gait; ’tis he. Villain, thou diest!

[_Rushes out, and makes a pass at Cassio._]

CASSIO.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better than thou know’st.
I will make proof of thine.

[_Draws, and wounds Roderigo._]

RODERIGO.
O, I am slain!

[_Iago rushes from his post, cuts Cassio behind in the leg, and exit._]

CASSIO.
I am maim’d forever. Help, ho! murder, murder!

[_Falls._]

Enter Othello.

OTHELLO.
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.

RODERIGO.
O, villain that I am!

OTHELLO.
It is even so.

CASSIO.
O, help, ho! light! a surgeon!

OTHELLO.
’Tis he. O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong!
Thou teachest me,—minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unbless’d fate hies. Strumpet, I come!
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
Thy bed, lust-stain’d, shall with lust’s blood be spotted.

[_Exit._]

Enter Lodovico and Gratiano.

CASSIO.
What, ho! No watch? No passage? murder, murder!

GRATIANO.
’Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.

CASSIO.
O, help!

LODOVICO.
Hark!

RODERIGO.
O wretched villain!

LODOVICO.
Two or three groan. It is a heavy night.
These may be counterfeits. Let’s think’t unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.

RODERIGO.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.

Enter Iago with a light.

LODOVICO.
Hark!

GRATIANO.
Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.

IAGO.
Who’s there? Whose noise is this that cries on murder?

LODOVICO.
We do not know.

IAGO.
Did not you hear a cry?

CASSIO.
Here, here! for heaven’s sake, help me!

IAGO.
What’s the matter?

GRATIANO.
This is Othello’s ancient, as I take it.

LODOVICO.
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.

IAGO.
What are you here that cry so grievously?

CASSIO.
Iago? O, I am spoil’d, undone by villains!
Give me some help.

IAGO.
O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?

CASSIO.
I think that one of them is hereabout,
And cannot make away.

IAGO.
O treacherous villains!
[_To Lodovico and Gratiano._] What are you there?
Come in and give some help.

RODERIGO.
O, help me here!

CASSIO.
That’s one of them.

IAGO.
O murderous slave! O villain!

[_Stabs Roderigo._]

RODERIGO.
O damn’d Iago! O inhuman dog!

IAGO.
Kill men i’ the dark! Where be these bloody thieves?
How silent is this town! Ho! murder! murder!
What may you be? Are you of good or evil?

LODOVICO.
As you shall prove us, praise us.

IAGO.
Signior Lodovico?

LODOVICO.
He, sir.

IAGO.
I cry you mercy. Here’s Cassio hurt by villains.

GRATIANO.
Cassio!

IAGO.
How is’t, brother?

CASSIO.
My leg is cut in two.

IAGO.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Light, gentlemen, I’ll bind it with my shirt.

Enter Bianca.

BIANCA.
What is the matter, ho? Who is’t that cried?

IAGO.
Who is’t that cried?

BIANCA.
O my dear Cassio, my sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO.
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?

CASSIO.
No.

GRATIANO.
I am sorry to find you thus; I have been to seek you.

IAGO.
Lend me a garter. So.—O, for a chair,
To bear him easily hence!

BIANCA.
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO.
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.
Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;
Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo? No. Yes, sure; O heaven! Roderigo.

GRATIANO.
What, of Venice?

IAGO.
Even he, sir. Did you know him?

GRATIANO.
Know him? Ay.

IAGO.
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon.
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
That so neglected you.

GRATIANO.
I am glad to see you.

IAGO.
How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!

GRATIANO.
Roderigo!

IAGO.
He, he, ’tis he.

[_A chair brought in._]

O, that’s well said; the chair.
Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
I’ll fetch the general’s surgeon. [_To Bianca_] For you, mistress,
Save you your labour. He that lies slain here, Cassio,
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?

CASSIO.
None in the world. Nor do I know the man.

IAGO.
[_To Bianca._] What, look you pale?—O, bear him out o’ the air.

[_Cassio and Roderigo are borne off._]

Stay you, good gentlemen.—Look you pale, mistress?
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.
Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.

Enter Emilia.

EMILIA.
’Las, what’s the matter? What’s the matter, husband?

IAGO.
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo, and fellows that are ’scap’d.
He’s almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

EMILIA.
Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!

IAGO.
This is the fruit of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supp’d tonight.
What, do you shake at that?

BIANCA.
He supp’d at my house, but I therefore shake not.

IAGO.
O, did he so? I charge you go with me.

EMILIA.
Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!

BIANCA.
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
As you that thus abuse me.

EMILIA.
As I? Foh! fie upon thee!

IAGO.
Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dress’d.
Come, mistress, you must tell’s another tale.
Emilia, run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath happ’d.
Will you go on afore? [_Aside._] This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.

[_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Cyprus. A Bedchamber in the castle.

Desdemona in bed asleep; a light burning.

Enter Othello.

OTHELLO.
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!
It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood,
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy light,
Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume. When I have pluck’d thy rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It must needs wither. I’ll smell it on the tree.

[_Kissing her._]

O, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword! One more, one more.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after. One more, and this the last.
So sweet was ne’er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow’s heavenly,
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.

DESDEMONA.
Who’s there? Othello?

OTHELLO.
Ay, Desdemona.

DESDEMONA.
Will you come to bed, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Have you pray’d tonight, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
Ay, my lord.

OTHELLO.
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconcil’d as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.

DESDEMONA.
Alack, my lord, what may you mean by that?

OTHELLO.
Well, do it, and be brief, I will walk by.
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit,
No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.

DESDEMONA.
Talk you of killing?

OTHELLO.
Ay, I do.

DESDEMONA.
Then heaven have mercy on me!

OTHELLO.
Amen, with all my heart!

DESDEMONA.
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

OTHELLO.
Hum!

DESDEMONA.
And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then
When your eyes roll so: why I should fear I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.

OTHELLO.
Think on thy sins.

DESDEMONA.
They are loves I bear to you.

OTHELLO.
Ay, and for that thou diest.

DESDEMONA.
That death’s unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.

OTHELLO.
Peace, and be still!

DESDEMONA.
I will so. What’s the matter?

OTHELLO.
That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee,
Thou gav’st to Cassio.

DESDEMONA.
No, by my life and soul!
Send for the man and ask him.

OTHELLO.
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury,
Thou’rt on thy death-bed.

DESDEMONA.
Ay, but not yet to die.

OTHELLO.
Yes, presently:
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin.
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.

DESDEMONA.
Then, Lord have mercy on me!

OTHELLO.
I say, amen.

DESDEMONA.
And have you mercy too! I never did
Offend you in my life,	 never lov’d Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love. I never gave him token.

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in ’s hand.
O perjur’d woman, thou dost stone my heart,
And mak’st me call what I intend to do
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice.
I saw the handkerchief.

DESDEMONA.
He found it then.
I never gave it him. Send for him hither.
Let him confess a truth.

OTHELLO.
He hath confess’d.

DESDEMONA.
What, my lord?

OTHELLO.
That he hath us’d thee.

DESDEMONA.
How? Unlawfully?

OTHELLO.
Ay.

DESDEMONA.
He will not say so.

OTHELLO.
No, his mouth is stopp’d.
Honest Iago hath ta’en order for ’t.

DESDEMONA.
O, my fear interprets! What, is he dead?

OTHELLO.
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, he is betray’d, and I undone!

OTHELLO.
Out, strumpet! Weep’st thou for him to my face?

DESDEMONA.
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!

OTHELLO.
Down, strumpet!

DESDEMONA.
Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight!

OTHELLO.
Nay, if you strive,—

DESDEMONA.
But half an hour!

OTHELLO.
Being done, there is no pause.

DESDEMONA.
But while I say one prayer!

OTHELLO.
It is too late.

[_Smothers her._]

EMILIA.
[_Within._] My lord, my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO.
What noise is this? Not dead? Not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel am yet merciful,
I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
So, so.

EMILIA.
[_Within._] What, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO.
Who’s there?

EMILIA.
[_Within._] O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!

OTHELLO.
Yes. ’Tis Emilia, by and by. She’s dead.
’Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death;
The noise was high.—Ha! no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were’t good?
I think she stirs again; no. What’s best to do?
If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife.
My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.
O, insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.

EMILIA.
[_Within._] I do beseech you
That I may speak with you, O, good my lord!

OTHELLO.
I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia.
Soft, by and by; let me the curtains draw.
Where art thou?

[_Unlocks the door._]

Enter Emilia.

What’s the matter with thee now?

EMILIA.
O, my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done!

OTHELLO.
What, now?

EMILIA.
But now, my lord.

OTHELLO.
It is the very error of the moon,
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont
And makes men mad.

EMILIA.
Cassio, my lord, hath kill’d a young Venetian
Call’d Roderigo.

OTHELLO.
Roderigo kill’d?
And Cassio kill’d?

EMILIA.
No, Cassio is not kill’d.

OTHELLO.
Not Cassio kill’d! Then murder’s out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.

DESDEMONA.
O, falsely, falsely murder’d!

EMILIA.
Alas, what cry is that?

OTHELLO.
That? What?

EMILIA.
Out, and alas! That was my lady’s voice.
Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again,
Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!

DESDEMONA.
A guiltless death I die.

EMILIA.
O, who hath done this deed?

DESDEMONA.
Nobody; I myself. Farewell.
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell!

[_She dies._]

OTHELLO.
Why, how should she be murder’d?

EMILIA.
Alas, who knows?

OTHELLO.
You heard her say herself, it was not I.

EMILIA.
She said so. I must needs report the truth.

OTHELLO.
She’s like a liar, gone to burning hell.
’Twas I that kill’d her.

EMILIA.
O, the more angel she,
And you the blacker devil!

OTHELLO.
She turn’d to folly, and she was a whore.

EMILIA.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.

OTHELLO.
She was false as water.

EMILIA.
Thou art rash as fire, to say
That she was false: O, she was heavenly true!

OTHELLO.
Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.
O, I were damn’d beneath all depth in hell,
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.

EMILIA.
My husband?

OTHELLO.
Thy husband.

EMILIA.
That she was false to wedlock?

OTHELLO.
Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I’d not have sold her for it.

EMILIA.
My husband?

OTHELLO.
Ay, ’twas he that told me first.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.

EMILIA.
My husband?

OTHELLO.
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.

EMILIA.
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!
My husband say that she was false?

OTHELLO.
He, woman;
I say thy husband: dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.

EMILIA.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart.
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.

OTHELLO.
Ha!

EMILIA.
Do thy worst:
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.

OTHELLO.
Peace, you were best.

EMILIA.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!
As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed
(I care not for thy sword) I’ll make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help! help, ho! help!
The Moor hath kill’d my mistress! Murder, murder!

Enter Montano, Gratiano and Iago.

MONTANO.
What is the matter? How now, general?

EMILIA.
O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
That men must lay their murders on your neck.

GRATIANO.
What is the matter?

EMILIA.
Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man.
He says thou told’st him that his wife was false.
I know thou didst not, thou’rt not such a villain.
Speak, for my heart is full.

IAGO.
I told him what I thought, and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.

EMILIA.
But did you ever tell him she was false?

IAGO.
I did.

EMILIA.
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie;
Upon my soul, a lie; a wicked lie.
She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?

IAGO.
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.

EMILIA.
I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak.
My mistress here lies murder’d in her bed.

ALL.
O heavens forfend!

EMILIA.
And your reports have set the murder on.

OTHELLO.
Nay, stare not, masters, it is true indeed.

GRATIANO.
’Tis a strange truth.

MONTANO.
O monstrous act!

EMILIA.
Villany, villany, villany!
I think upon’t, I think I smell’t; O villany!
I thought so then. I’ll kill myself for grief.
O villany, villany!

IAGO.
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.

EMILIA.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.
’Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
Perchance, Iago, I will ne’er go home.

OTHELLO.
O! O! O!

[_Hanging over his wife._]

EMILIA.
Nay, lay thee down and roar;
For thou hast kill’d the sweetest innocent
That e’er did lift up eye.

OTHELLO.
[_Rising._] O, she was foul!
I scarce did know you, uncle, there lies your niece,
Whose breath indeed these hands have newly stopp’d.
I know this act shows horrible and grim.

GRATIANO.
Poor Desdemona! I am glad thy father’s dead.
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain: did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobance.

OTHELLO.
’Tis pitiful. But yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed; Cassio confess’d it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her; I saw it in his hand.
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.

EMILIA.
O heaven! O heavenly powers!

IAGO.
Come, hold your peace.

EMILIA.
’Twill out, ’twill out. I peace?
No, I will speak as liberal as the north.
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.

IAGO.
Be wise, and get you home.

EMILIA.
I will not.

[_Iago offers to stab his wife._]

GRATIANO.
Fie!
Your sword upon a woman?

EMILIA.
O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak’st of
I found by fortune and did give my husband;
For often with a solemn earnestness,
More than indeed belong’d to such a trifle,
He begg’d of me to steal it.

IAGO.
Villanous whore!

EMILIA.
She give it Cassio! no, alas, I found it,
And I did give’t my husband.

IAGO.
Filth, thou liest!

EMILIA.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.
O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool
Do with so good a wife?

OTHELLO
Are there not stones in heaven
But what serve for thunder? Precious villain!

[_Iago stabs Emilia and then runs out._]

GRATIANO.
The woman falls. Sure, he hath kill’d his wife.

EMILIA.
Ay, ay. O, lay me by my mistress’ side.

GRATIANO.
He’s gone, but his wife’s kill’d.

MONTANO.
’Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,
Which I have here recover’d from the Moor.
Come, guard the door without, let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain,
For ’tis a damned slave.

[_Exit Montano and Gratiano._]

OTHELLO.
I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword.
But why should honour outlive honesty?
Let it go all.

EMILIA.
What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,
And die in music.
[_Sings._] _Willow, willow, willow._
Moor, she was chaste. She lov’d thee, cruel Moor,
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
So speaking as I think, I die, I die.

[_She dies._]

OTHELLO.
I have another weapon in this chamber,
It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook’s temper.
O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.

GRATIANO.
[_Within._] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

OTHELLO.
Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.

Enter Gratiano.

GRATIANO.
What is the matter?

OTHELLO.
Behold, I have a weapon.
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldier’s thigh: I have seen the day
That with this little arm and this good sword
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop. But, O vain boast!
Who can control his fate? ’Tis not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon’d.
Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt,
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismay’d? ’Tis a lost fear.
Man but a rush against Othello’s breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr’d wench,
Pale as thy smock, when we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl!
Even like thy chastity.
O cursed, cursed slave! Whip me, ye devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulphur,
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
O Desdemon! Dead, Desdemon! dead! Oh, oh!

Enter Lodovico, Montano, Cassio carried in a chair, and Officers with
Iago prisoner.

LODOVICO.
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?

OTHELLO.
That’s he that was Othello. Here I am.

LODOVICO.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.

OTHELLO.
I look down towards his feet; but that’s a fable.
If that thou be’st a devil, I cannot kill thee.

[_Wounds Iago._]

LODOVICO.
Wrench his sword from him.

IAGO.
I bleed, sir, but not kill’d.

OTHELLO.
I am not sorry neither. I’d have thee live,
For in my sense ’tis happiness to die.

LODOVICO.
O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
Fall’n in the practice of a damned slave,
What shall be said to thee?

OTHELLO.
Why, anything;
An honourable murderer, if you will.
For naught did I in hate, but all in honour.

LODOVICO.
This wretch hath part confess’d his villany.
Did you and he consent in Cassio’s death?

OTHELLO.
Ay.

CASSIO.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.

OTHELLO.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnar’d my soul and body?

IAGO.
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know.
From this time forth I never will speak word.

LODOVICO.
What, not to pray?

GRATIANO.
Torments will ope your lips.

OTHELLO.
Well, thou dost best.

LODOVICO.
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall’n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
And here another. The one of them imports
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Roderigo.

OTHELLO.
O villain!

CASSIO.
Most heathenish and most gross!

LODOVICO.
Now here’s another discontented paper,
Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain,
But that, belike, Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.

OTHELLO.
O the pernicious caitiff!
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wife’s?

CASSIO.
I found it in my chamber.
And he himself confess’d but even now,
That there he dropp’d it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.

OTHELLO.
O fool! fool! fool!

CASSIO.
There is besides in Roderigo’s letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast. And even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.

LODOVICO.
You must forsake this room, and go with us.
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.

OTHELLO.
Soft you; a word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they know’t.
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
Perplex’d in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdu’d eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum. Set you down this.
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turban’d Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduc’d the state,
I took by the throat the circumcised dog,
And smote him, thus.

[_Stabs himself._]

LODOVICO.
O bloody period!

GRATIANO.
All that’s spoke is marr’d.

OTHELLO.
I kiss’d thee ere I kill’d thee. No way but this,
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.

[_Falling upon Desdemona._]

CASSIO.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
For he was great of heart.

LODOVICO.
[_To Iago._] O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,
Look on the tragic loading of this bed.
This is thy work. The object poisons sight,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain.
The time, the place, the torture, O, enforce it!
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.

[_Exeunt._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KING LEAR ***




THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR

by William Shakespeare




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. A Room of State in King Lear’s Palace
Scene II. A Hall in the Earl of Gloucester’s Castle
Scene III. A Room in the Duke of Albany’s Palace
Scene IV. A Hall in Albany’s Palace
Scene V. Court before the Duke of Albany’s Palace

ACT II
Scene I. A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester
Scene II. Before Gloucester’s Castle
Scene III. The open Country
Scene IV. Before Gloucester’s Castle

ACT III
Scene I. A Heath
Scene II. Another part of the heath
Scene III. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle
Scene IV. A part of the Heath with a Hovel
Scene V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle
Scene VI. A Chamber in a Farmhouse adjoining the Castle
Scene VII. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

ACT IV
Scene I. The heath
Scene II. Before the Duke of Albany’s Palace
Scene III. The French camp near Dover
Scene IV. The French camp. A Tent
Scene V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle
Scene VI. The country near Dover
Scene VII. A Tent in the French Camp

ACT V
Scene I. The Camp of the British Forces near Dover
Scene II. A field between the two Camps
Scene III. The British Camp near Dover




 Dramatis Personæ 

LEAR, King of Britain.
GONERIL, eldest daughter to Lear.
REGAN, second daughter to Lear.
CORDELIA, youngest daughter to Lear.
DUKE of ALBANY, married to Goneril.
DUKE of CORNWALL, married to Regan.
KING of FRANCE.
DUKE of BURGUNDY.
EARL of GLOUCESTER.
EDGAR, elder son to Gloucester.
EDMUND, younger bastard son to Gloucester.
EARL of KENT.
FOOL.
OSWALD, steward to Goneril.
CURAN, a Courtier.
OLD MAN, Tenant to Gloucester.
Physician.
An Officer employed by Edmund.
Gentleman, attendant on Cordelia.
A Herald.
Servants to Cornwall.

Knights attending on the King, Officers, Messengers, Soldiers and
Attendants.

SCENE: Britain




ACT I

SCENE I. A Room of State in King Lear’s Palace


 Enter Kent, Gloucester and Edmund.

KENT.
I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall.

GLOUCESTER.
It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the kingdom,
it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for qualities are so
weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either’s moiety.

KENT.
Is not this your son, my lord?

GLOUCESTER.
His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I have so often
blush’d to acknowledge him that now I am braz’d to’t.

KENT.
I cannot conceive you.

GLOUCESTER.
Sir, this young fellow’s mother could; whereupon she grew
round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?

KENT.
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.

GLOUCESTER.
But I have a son, sir, by order of law, some year elder than
this, who yet is no dearer in my account: though this knave came
something saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was
his mother fair; there was good sport at his making, and the
whoreson must be acknowledged. Do you know this noble gentleman,
Edmund?

EDMUND.
No, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
My Lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my honourable friend.

EDMUND.
My services to your lordship.

KENT.
I must love you, and sue to know you better.

EDMUND.
Sir, I shall study deserving.

GLOUCESTER.
He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again. The King
is coming.

 [_Sennet within._]

 Enter Lear, Cornwall, Albany, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia and Attendants.

LEAR.
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy,
Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
I shall, my lord.

 [_Exeunt Gloucester and Edmund._]

LEAR.
Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the map there. Know that we have divided
In three our kingdom: and ’tis our fast intent
To shake all cares and business from our age;
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Unburden’d crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
And here are to be answer’d. Tell me, my daughters,—
Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state,—
Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
That we our largest bounty may extend
Where nature doth with merit challenge.—Goneril,
Our eldest born, speak first.

GONERIL.
Sir, I love you more than word can wield the matter;
Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
Beyond what can be valu’d, rich or rare;
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
As much as child e’er lov’d, or father found;
A love that makes breath poor and speech unable;
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

CORDELIA.
[_Aside._] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.

LEAR.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
With shadowy forests and with champains rich’d,
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
We make thee lady: to thine and Albany’s issue
Be this perpetual.—What says our second daughter,
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.

REGAN.
Sir, I am made of the self mettle as my sister,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
I find she names my very deed of love;
Only she comes too short, that I profess
Myself an enemy to all other joys
Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear highness’ love.

CORDELIA.
[_Aside._] Then poor Cordelia,
And yet not so; since, I am sure, my love’s
More ponderous than my tongue.

LEAR.
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom;
No less in space, validity, and pleasure
Than that conferr’d on Goneril.—Now, our joy,
Although the last and least; to whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
Strive to be interess’d; what can you say to draw
A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.

CORDELIA.
Nothing, my lord.

LEAR.
Nothing?

CORDELIA.
Nothing.

LEAR.
Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.

CORDELIA.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty
According to my bond; no more nor less.

LEAR.
How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Lest you may mar your fortunes.

CORDELIA.
Good my lord,
You have begot me, bred me, lov’d me: I
Return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
Why have my sisters husbands if they say
They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty:
Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
To love my father all.

LEAR.
But goes thy heart with this?

CORDELIA.
Ay, my good lord.

LEAR.
So young, and so untender?

CORDELIA.
So young, my lord, and true.

LEAR.
Let it be so, thy truth then be thy dower:
For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
By all the operation of the orbs,
From whom we do exist and cease to be;
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighbour’d, pitied, and reliev’d,
As thou my sometime daughter.

KENT.
Good my liege,—

LEAR.
Peace, Kent!
Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
I lov’d her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery. [_To Cordelia._] Hence and avoid my sight!
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
Her father’s heart from her! Call France. Who stirs?
Call Burgundy! Cornwall and Albany,
With my two daughters’ dowers digest this third:
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
I do invest you jointly with my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred knights,
By you to be sustain’d, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain
The name, and all the addition to a king; the sway,
Revenue, execution of the rest,
Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,
This coronet part between you.
 [_Giving the crown._]

KENT.
Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honour’d as my king,
Lov’d as my father, as my master follow’d,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers.—

LEAR.
The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.

KENT.
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly
When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour’s bound
When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy state;
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgement,
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;
Nor are those empty-hearted, whose low sounds
Reverb no hollowness.

LEAR.
Kent, on thy life, no more.

KENT.
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thine enemies; ne’er fear to lose it,
Thy safety being the motive.

LEAR.
Out of my sight!

KENT.
See better, Lear; and let me still remain
The true blank of thine eye.

LEAR.
Now, by Apollo,—

KENT.
Now by Apollo, King,
Thou swear’st thy gods in vain.

LEAR.
O vassal! Miscreant!

 [_Laying his hand on his sword._]

ALBANY and CORNWALL.
Dear sir, forbear!

KENT.
Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.

LEAR.
Hear me, recreant! on thine allegiance, hear me!
Since thou hast sought to make us break our vows,
Which we durst never yet, and with strain’d pride
To come betwixt our sentences and our power,
Which nor our nature, nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward.
Five days we do allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from disasters of the world;
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom: if, on the next day following,
Thy banish’d trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
This shall not be revok’d.

KENT.
Fare thee well, King: sith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
[_To Cordelia._] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
That justly think’st and hast most rightly said!
[_To Goneril and Regan._] And your large speeches may your deeds
approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love.
Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
He’ll shape his old course in a country new.

 [_Exit._]

 Flourish. Re-enter Gloucester, with France, Burgundy and Attendants.

CORDELIA.
Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.

LEAR.
My Lord of Burgundy,
We first address toward you, who with this king
Hath rivall’d for our daughter: what in the least
Will you require in present dower with her,
Or cease your quest of love?

BURGUNDY.
Most royal majesty,
I crave no more than hath your highness offer’d,
Nor will you tender less.

LEAR.
Right noble Burgundy,
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
But now her price is fall’n. Sir, there she stands:
If aught within that little-seeming substance,
Or all of it, with our displeasure piec’d,
And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,
She’s there, and she is yours.

BURGUNDY.
I know no answer.

LEAR.
Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Dower’d with our curse, and stranger’d with our oath,
Take her or leave her?

BURGUNDY.
Pardon me, royal sir;
Election makes not up in such conditions.

LEAR.
Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,
I tell you all her wealth. [_To France_] For you, great king,
I would not from your love make such a stray
To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
T’avert your liking a more worthier way
Than on a wretch whom nature is asham’d
Almost t’acknowledge hers.

FRANCE.
This is most strange,
That she, who even but now was your best object,
The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
So many folds of favour. Sure her offence
Must be of such unnatural degree
That monsters it, or your fore-vouch’d affection
Fall into taint; which to believe of her
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
Should never plant in me.

CORDELIA.
I yet beseech your majesty,
If for I want that glib and oily art
To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,
I’ll do’t before I speak,—that you make known
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
No unchaste action or dishonour’d step,
That hath depriv’d me of your grace and favour;
But even for want of that for which I am richer,
A still soliciting eye, and such a tongue
As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
Hath lost me in your liking.

LEAR.
Better thou hadst
Not been born than not to have pleas’d me better.

FRANCE.
Is it but this?—a tardiness in nature
Which often leaves the history unspoke
That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the lady? Love’s not love
When it is mingled with regards that stands
Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.

BURGUNDY.
Royal King,
Give but that portion which yourself propos’d,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Duchess of Burgundy.

LEAR.
Nothing: I have sworn; I am firm.

BURGUNDY.
I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
That you must lose a husband.

CORDELIA.
Peace be with Burgundy!
Since that respects of fortunes are his love,
I shall not be his wife.

FRANCE.
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
Most choice forsaken; and most lov’d, despis’d!
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:
Be it lawful, I take up what’s cast away.
Gods, gods! ’Tis strange that from their cold’st neglect
My love should kindle to inflam’d respect.
Thy dowerless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy
Can buy this unpriz’d precious maid of me.
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:
Thou losest here, a better where to find.

LEAR.
Thou hast her, France: let her be thine; for we
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
Without our grace, our love, our benison.
Come, noble Burgundy.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt Lear, Burgundy, Cornwall, Albany, Gloucester and
 Attendants._]

FRANCE.
Bid farewell to your sisters.

CORDELIA.
The jewels of our father, with wash’d eyes
Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are;
And like a sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are nam’d. Love well our father:
To your professed bosoms I commit him:
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place.
So farewell to you both.

REGAN.
Prescribe not us our duties.

GONERIL.
Let your study
Be to content your lord, who hath receiv’d you
At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

CORDELIA.
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides:
Who covers faults, at last shame derides.
Well may you prosper.

FRANCE.
Come, my fair Cordelia.

 [_Exeunt France and Cordelia._]

GONERIL.
Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
appertains to us both. I think our father will hence tonight.

REGAN.
That’s most certain, and with you; next month with us.

GONERIL.
You see how full of changes his age is; the observation we
have made of it hath not been little: he always loved our
sister most; and with what poor judgement he hath now cast her
off appears too grossly.

REGAN.
’Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever but slenderly
known himself.

GONERIL.
The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then must
we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of
long-engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness
that infirm and choleric years bring with them.

REGAN.
Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent’s
banishment.

GONERIL.
There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
him. Pray you let us hit together: if our father carry authority
with such disposition as he bears, this last surrender of his
will but offend us.

REGAN.
We shall further think of it.

GONERIL.
We must do something, and i’ th’ heat.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Hall in the Earl of Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Edmund with a
letter.

EDMUND.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
My services are bound. Wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of nations to deprive me?
For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
Lag of a brother? Why bastard? Wherefore base?
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true
As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us
With base? With baseness? bastardy? Base, base?
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
More composition and fierce quality
Than doth within a dull stale tired bed
Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops
Got ’tween asleep and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land:
Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund
As to the legitimate: fine word: legitimate!
Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
Shall top the legitimate. I grow, I prosper.
Now, gods, stand up for bastards!

 Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
Kent banish’d thus! and France in choler parted!
And the King gone tonight! Prescrib’d his pow’r!
Confin’d to exhibition! All this done
Upon the gad!—Edmund, how now! What news?

EDMUND.
So please your lordship, none.

 [_Putting up the letter._]

GLOUCESTER.
Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?

EDMUND.
I know no news, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
What paper were you reading?

EDMUND.
Nothing, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? The
quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come,
if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.

EDMUND.
I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother that I
have not all o’er-read; and for so much as I have perus’d, I find it
not fit for your o’er-looking.

GLOUCESTER.
Give me the letter, sir.

EDMUND.
I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as in
part I understand them, are to blame.

GLOUCESTER.
Let’s see, let’s see!

EDMUND.
I hope, for my brother’s justification, he wrote this but as an
essay, or taste of my virtue.

GLOUCESTER.
[_Reads._] ‘This policy and reverence of age makes the world
bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny; who sways
not as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to me, that
of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
the beloved of your brother EDGAR.’
Hum! Conspiracy? ‘Sleep till I wake him, you should enjoy half
his revenue.’—My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? A heart
and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?

EDMUND.
It was not brought me, my lord, there’s the cunning of it. I
found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.

GLOUCESTER.
You know the character to be your brother’s?

EDMUND.
If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his; but
in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.

GLOUCESTER.
It is his.

EDMUND.
It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
contents.

GLOUCESTER.
Has he never before sounded you in this business?

EDMUND.
Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit
that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declined, the father
should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.

GLOUCESTER.
O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him; I’ll apprehend him. Abominable
villain, Where is he?

EDMUND.
I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend
your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour, and shake
in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
for him, that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
honour, and to no other pretence of danger.

GLOUCESTER.
Think you so?

EDMUND.
If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us
confer of this, and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction,
and that without any further delay than this very evening.

GLOUCESTER.
He cannot be such a monster.

EDMUND.
Nor is not, sure.

GLOUCESTER.
To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. Heaven
and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray you:
frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate myself
to be in a due resolution.

EDMUND.
I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I shall
find means, and acquaint you withal.

GLOUCESTER.
These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us:
though the wisdom of Nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools,
friendship falls off, brothers divide: in cities, mutinies; in
countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond cracked
’twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
prediction; there’s son against father: the King falls from
bias of nature; there’s father against child. We have seen the
best of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out
this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
carefully.—And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his
offence, honesty! ’Tis strange.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
sick in fortune, often the surfeits of our own behaviour, we
make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as
if we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance;
drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of
planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his
goatish disposition to the charge of a star. My father compounded
with my mother under the dragon’s tail, and my nativity was under
Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut! I
should have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the
firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.

 Enter Edgar.

Pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy: my cue
is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o’Bedlam.—O,
these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.

EDGAR.
How now, brother Edmund, what serious contemplation are you in?

EDMUND.
I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
what should follow these eclipses.

EDGAR.
Do you busy yourself with that?

EDMUND.
I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as of
unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death, dearth,
dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state, menaces and
maledictions against King and nobles; needless diffidences,
banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches,
and I know not what.

EDGAR.
How long have you been a sectary astronomical?

EDMUND.
Come, come! when saw you my father last?

EDGAR.
The night gone by.

EDMUND.
Spake you with him?

EDGAR.
Ay, two hours together.

EDMUND.
Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him, by word
nor countenance?

EDGAR.
None at all.

EDMUND.
Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him: and at my
entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
qualified the heat of his displeasure; which at this instant so
rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
scarcely allay.

EDGAR.
Some villain hath done me wrong.

EDMUND.
That’s my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till the
speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me to
my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord
speak: pray ye, go; there’s my key. If you do stir abroad, go
armed.

EDGAR.
Armed, brother?

EDMUND.
Brother, I advise you to the best; I am no honest man
if there be any good meaning toward you: I have told you what I
have seen and heard. But faintly; nothing like the image and
horror of it: pray you, away!

EDGAR.
Shall I hear from you anon?

EDMUND.
I do serve you in this business.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

A credulous father! and a brother noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms
That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy! I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Room in the Duke of Albany’s Palace

 Enter Goneril and Oswald.

GONERIL.
Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?

OSWALD.
Ay, madam.

GONERIL.
By day and night, he wrongs me; every hour
He flashes into one gross crime or other,
That sets us all at odds; I’ll not endure it:
His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him; say I am sick.
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well; the fault of it I’ll answer.

 [_Horns within._]

OSWALD.
He’s coming, madam; I hear him.

GONERIL.
Put on what weary negligence you please,
You and your fellows; I’d have it come to question:
If he distaste it, let him to our sister,
Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,
Not to be overruled. Idle old man,
That still would manage those authorities
That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
Old fools are babes again; and must be us’d
With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus’d.
Remember what I have said.

OSWALD.
Very well, madam.

GONERIL.
And let his knights have colder looks among you;
What grows of it, no matter; advise your fellows so;
I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
That I may speak. I’ll write straight to my sister
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Hall in Albany’s Palace

 Enter Kent, disguised.

KENT.
If but as well I other accents borrow,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent
May carry through itself to that full issue
For which I rais’d my likeness. Now, banish’d Kent,
If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn’d,
So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov’st,
Shall find thee full of labours.

 Horns within. Enter King
Lear, Knights and Attendants.

LEAR.
Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

How now! what art thou?

KENT.
A man, sir.

LEAR.
What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?

KENT.
I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve him truly that
will put me in trust; to love him that is honest; to converse
with him that is wise and says little; to fear judgement; to fight
when I cannot choose; and to eat no fish.

LEAR.
What art thou?

KENT.
A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.

LEAR.
If thou be’st as poor for a subject as he’s for a king, thou art
poor enough. What wouldst thou?

KENT.
Service.

LEAR.
Who wouldst thou serve?

KENT.
You.

LEAR.
Dost thou know me, fellow?

KENT.
No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would fain
call master.

LEAR.
What’s that?

KENT.
Authority.

LEAR.
What services canst thou do?

KENT.
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of
me is diligence.

LEAR.
How old art thou?

KENT.
Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing; nor so old to
dote on her for anything: I have years on my back forty-eight.

LEAR.
Follow me; thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worse after dinner, I
will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner! Where’s my knave? my
fool? Go you and call my fool hither.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

 Enter Oswald.

You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter?

OSWALD.
So please you,—

 [_Exit._]

LEAR.
What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.

 [_Exit a Knight._]

Where’s my fool? Ho, I think the world’s asleep.

 Re-enter Knight.

How now! where’s that mongrel?

KNIGHT.
He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.

LEAR.
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?

KNIGHT.
Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.

LEAR.
He would not?

KNIGHT.
My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgement your
highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as
you were wont; there’s a great abatement of kindness appears as
well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also, and
your daughter.

LEAR.
Ha! say’st thou so?

KNIGHT.
I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken; for my duty
cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.

LEAR.
Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception: I have perceived
a most faint neglect of late; which I have rather blamed as mine
own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence and purpose of
unkindness: I will look further into’t. But where’s my fool? I
have not seen him this two days.

KNIGHT.
Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, the fool hath much
pined away.

LEAR.
No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you and tell my
daughter I would speak with her.

 [_Exit Attendant._]

Go you, call hither my fool.

 [_Exit another Attendant._]

 Re-enter Oswald.

O, you, sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I, sir?

OSWALD.
My lady’s father.

LEAR.
My lady’s father! my lord’s knave: you whoreson dog! you slave! you
cur!

OSWALD.
I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.

LEAR.
Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?

 [_Striking him._]

OSWALD.
I’ll not be struck, my lord.

KENT.
Nor tripp’d neither, you base football player.

 [_Tripping up his heels._]

LEAR.
I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv’st me, and I’ll love thee.

KENT.
Come, sir, arise, away! I’ll teach you differences: away, away! If you
will measure your lubber’s length again, tarry; but away! go to; have
you wisdom? So.

 [_Pushes Oswald out._]

LEAR.
Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there’s earnest of thy service.

 [_Giving Kent money._]

 Enter Fool.

FOOL.
Let me hire him too; here’s my coxcomb.

 [_Giving Kent his cap._]

LEAR.
How now, my pretty knave, how dost thou?

FOOL.
Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.

KENT.
Why, fool?

FOOL.
Why, for taking one’s part that’s out of favour. Nay, an thou
canst not smile as the wind sits, thou’lt catch cold shortly:
there, take my coxcomb: why, this fellow has banish’d two on’s
daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will; if
thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. How now,
nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!

LEAR.
Why, my boy?

FOOL.
If I gave them all my living, I’d keep my coxcombs myself. There’s
mine; beg another of thy daughters.

LEAR.
Take heed, sirrah, the whip.

FOOL.
Truth’s a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped out, when
the Lady Brach may stand by the fire and stink.

LEAR.
A pestilent gall to me!

FOOL.
Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.

LEAR.
Do.

FOOL.
Mark it, nuncle:
    Have more than thou showest,
    Speak less than thou knowest,
    Lend less than thou owest,
    Ride more than thou goest,
    Learn more than thou trowest,
    Set less than thou throwest;
    Leave thy drink and thy whore,
    And keep in-a-door,
    And thou shalt have more
    Than two tens to a score.

KENT.
This is nothing, fool.

FOOL.
Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer, you gave me
nothing for’t. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?

LEAR.
Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of nothing.

FOOL.
[_to Kent._] Prythee tell him, so much the rent of his land
comes to: he will not believe a fool.

LEAR.
A bitter fool.

FOOL.
Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and
a sweet one?

LEAR.
No, lad; teach me.

FOOL.
   That lord that counsell’d thee
     To give away thy land,
   Come place him here by me,
     Do thou for him stand.
   The sweet and bitter fool
     Will presently appear;
   The one in motley here,
     The other found out there.

LEAR.
Dost thou call me fool, boy?

FOOL.
All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast born
with.

KENT.
This is not altogether fool, my lord.

FOOL.
No, faith; lords and great men will not let me; if I had a
monopoly out, they would have part on’t and ladies too, they
will not let me have all the fool to myself; they’ll be
snatching. Nuncle, give me an egg, and I’ll give thee two
crowns.

LEAR.
What two crowns shall they be?

FOOL.
Why, after I have cut the egg i’ the middle and eat up the
meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i’
the middle and gav’st away both parts, thou bor’st thine ass on
thy back o’er the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
when thou gav’st thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in
this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.
[_Singing._]
   Fools had ne’er less grace in a year;
     For wise men are grown foppish,
   And know not how their wits to wear,
     Their manners are so apish.

LEAR.
When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?

FOOL.
I have used it, nuncle, e’er since thou mad’st thy daughters thy
mothers; for when thou gav’st them the rod, and put’st down thine
own breeches,
[_Singing._]
   Then they for sudden joy did weep,
     And I for sorrow sung,
   That such a king should play bo-peep,
     And go the fools among.
Prythee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
lie; I would fain learn to lie.

LEAR.
An you lie, sirrah, we’ll have you whipped.

FOOL.
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are: they’ll have me
whipped for speaking true; thou’lt have me whipped for lying;
and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be
any kind o’thing than a fool: and yet I would not be thee,
nuncle: thou hast pared thy wit o’both sides, and left nothing
i’ the middle: here comes one o’ the parings.

 Enter Goneril.

LEAR.
How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on? Methinks you
are too much of late i’ the frown.

FOOL.
Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for
her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure: I am better
than thou art now. I am a fool, thou art nothing. [_To Goneril._]
Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face bids me, though
you say nothing. Mum, mum,
     He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
     Weary of all, shall want some.
[_Pointing to Lear_.] That’s a shealed peascod.

GONERIL.
Not only, sir, this your all-licens’d fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly carp and quarrel; breaking forth
In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,
By what yourself too late have spoke and done,
That you protect this course, and put it on
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
Might in their working do you that offence
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.

FOOL.
For you know, nuncle,
   The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
   That it’s had it head bit off by it young.
So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.

LEAR.
Are you our daughter?

GONERIL.
Come, sir,
I would you would make use of that good wisdom,
Whereof I know you are fraught; and put away
These dispositions, which of late transform you
From what you rightly are.

FOOL.
May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I
love thee!

LEAR.
Doth any here know me? This is not Lear;
Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
Either his notion weakens, his discernings
Are lethargied. Ha! waking? ’Tis not so!
Who is it that can tell me who I am?

FOOL.
Lear’s shadow.

LEAR.
I would learn that; for by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge and
reason, I should be false persuaded I had daughters.

FOOL.
Which they will make an obedient father.

LEAR.
Your name, fair gentlewoman?

GONERIL.
This admiration, sir, is much o’ the favour
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright:
As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
Men so disorder’d, so debosh’d and bold
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel
Than a grac’d palace. The shame itself doth speak
For instant remedy. Be, then, desir’d
By her that else will take the thing she begs
A little to disquantity your train;
And the remainder that shall still depend,
To be such men as may besort your age,
Which know themselves, and you.

LEAR.
Darkness and devils!
Saddle my horses; call my train together.
Degenerate bastard! I’ll not trouble thee:
Yet have I left a daughter.

GONERIL.
You strike my people; and your disorder’d rabble
Make servants of their betters.

 Enter Albany.

LEAR.
Woe that too late repents!—
[_To Albany._] O, sir, are you come?
Is it your will? Speak, sir.—Prepare my horses.
Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child
Than the sea-monster!

ALBANY.
Pray, sir, be patient.

LEAR.
[_to Goneril._] Detested kite, thou liest.
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know;
And in the most exact regard support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
Which, like an engine, wrench’d my frame of nature
From the fix’d place; drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
[_Striking his head._] Beat at this gate that let thy folly in
And thy dear judgement out! Go, go, my people.

ALBANY.
My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.

LEAR.
It may be so, my lord.
Hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear!
Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
To make this creature fruitful!
Into her womb convey sterility!
Dry up in her the organs of increase;
And from her derogate body never spring
A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
Create her child of spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatur’d torment to her!
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;
With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks;
Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits
To laughter and contempt; that she may feel
How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is
To have a thankless child! Away, away!

 [_Exit._]

ALBANY.
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?

GONERIL.
Never afflict yourself to know more of it;
But let his disposition have that scope
That dotage gives it.

 Re-enter Lear.

LEAR.
What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?

ALBANY.
What’s the matter, sir?

LEAR.
I’ll tell thee. [_To Goneril._] Life and death! I am
asham’d
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
Th’untented woundings of a father’s curse
Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
Beweep this cause again, I’ll pluck ye out,
And cast you with the waters that you lose
To temper clay. Ha! Let it be so.
I have another daughter,
Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think
I have cast off for ever.

 [_Exeunt Lear, Kent and Attendants._]

GONERIL.
Do you mark that?

ALBANY.
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
To the great love I bear you,—

GONERIL.
Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho!
[_To the Fool._] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.

FOOL.
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool with thee.
   A fox when one has caught her,
   And such a daughter,
   Should sure to the slaughter,
   If my cap would buy a halter;
   So the fool follows after.

 [_Exit._]

GONERIL.
This man hath had good counsel.—A hundred knights!
’Tis politic and safe to let him keep
At point a hundred knights: yes, that on every dream,
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powers,
And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say!

ALBANY.
Well, you may fear too far.

GONERIL.
Safer than trust too far:
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.
What he hath utter’d I have writ my sister:
If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
When I have show’d th’unfitness,—

 Re-enter Oswald.

How now, Oswald!
What, have you writ that letter to my sister?

OSWALD.
Ay, madam.

GONERIL.
Take you some company, and away to horse:
Inform her full of my particular fear;
And thereto add such reasons of your own
As may compact it more. Get you gone;
And hasten your return.

 [_Exit Oswald._]

No, no, my lord!
This milky gentleness and course of yours,
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
You are much more attask’d for want of wisdom
Than prais’d for harmful mildness.

ALBANY.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell:
Striving to better, oft we mar what’s well.

GONERIL.
Nay then,—

ALBANY.
Well, well; the event.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Court before the Duke of Albany’s Palace

 Enter Lear, Kent and Fool.

LEAR.
Go you before to Gloucester with these letters: acquaint my
daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I
shall be there afore you.

KENT.
I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.

 [_Exit._]

FOOL.
If a man’s brains were in’s heels, were’t not in danger of
kibes?

LEAR.
Ay, boy.

FOOL.
Then I prythee be merry; thy wit shall not go slipshod.

LEAR.
Ha, ha, ha!

FOOL.
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly, for though
she’s as like this as a crab’s like an apple, yet I can tell
what I can tell.

LEAR.
What canst tell, boy?

FOOL.
She’ll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou
canst tell why one’s nose stands i’the middle on’s face?

LEAR.
No.

FOOL.
Why, to keep one’s eyes of either side’s nose, that what a man
cannot smell out, he may spy into.

LEAR.
I did her wrong.

FOOL.
Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?

LEAR.
No.

FOOL.
Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.

LEAR.
Why?

FOOL.
Why, to put’s head in; not to give it away to his daughters, and
leave his horns without a case.

LEAR.
I will forget my nature. So kind a father! Be my horses ready?

FOOL.
Thy asses are gone about ’em. The reason why the seven stars are
no more than seven is a pretty reason.

LEAR.
Because they are not eight?

FOOL.
Yes indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.

LEAR.
To tak’t again perforce!—Monster ingratitude!

FOOL.
If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I’d have thee beaten for being
old before thy time.

LEAR.
How’s that?

FOOL.
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.

LEAR.
O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
Keep me in temper; I would not be mad!

 Enter Gentleman.

How now? are the horses ready?

GENTLEMAN.
Ready, my lord.

LEAR.
Come, boy.

FOOL.
She that’s a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester


 Enter Edmund and Curan, meeting.

EDMUND.
Save thee, Curan.

CURAN.
And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him
notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his Duchess will be
here with him this night.

EDMUND.
How comes that?

CURAN.
Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad; I mean the
whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?

EDMUND.
Not I: pray you, what are they?

CURAN.
Have you heard of no likely wars toward, ’twixt the two dukes
of Cornwall and Albany?

EDMUND.
Not a word.

CURAN.
You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
The Duke be here tonight? The better! best!
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother;
And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
Which I must act. Briefness and fortune work!
Brother, a word, descend, brother, I say!

 Enter Edgar.

My father watches: O sir, fly this place;
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
You have now the good advantage of the night.
Have you not spoken ’gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
He’s coming hither; now, i’ the night, i’ the haste,
And Regan with him: have you nothing said
Upon his party ’gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.

EDGAR.
I am sure on’t, not a word.

EDMUND.
I hear my father coming:—pardon me;
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you:
Draw: seem to defend yourself: now quit you well.
Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!
Fly, brother. Torches, torches!—So farewell.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavour: [_Wounds his arm._]
I have seen drunkards
Do more than this in sport. Father, father!
Stop, stop! No help?

 Enter Gloucester and
Servants with torches.

GLOUCESTER.
Now, Edmund, where’s the villain?

EDMUND.
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
To stand auspicious mistress.

GLOUCESTER.
But where is he?

EDMUND.
Look, sir, I bleed.

GLOUCESTER.
Where is the villain, Edmund?

EDMUND.
Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could,—

GLOUCESTER.
Pursue him, ho! Go after.

 [_Exeunt Servants._]

—By no means what?

EDMUND.
Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;
But that I told him the revenging gods
’Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared sword, he charges home
My unprovided body, latch’d mine arm;
But when he saw my best alarum’d spirits,
Bold in the quarrel’s right, rous’d to th’encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.

GLOUCESTER.
Let him fly far;
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
And found—dispatch’d. The noble Duke my master,
My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight:
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
He that conceals him, death.

EDMUND.
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
I threaten’d to discover him: he replied,
‘Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faith’d? No: what I should deny
As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce
My very character, I’d turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice:
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spurs
To make thee seek it.

GLOUCESTER.
O strange and fast’ned villain!
Would he deny his letter, said he? I never got him.

 [_Tucket within._]

Hark, the Duke’s trumpets! I know not why he comes.
All ports I’ll bar; the villain shall not scape;
The Duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have due note of him; and of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means
To make thee capable.

 Enter Cornwall, Regan and
Attendants.

CORNWALL.
How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

REGAN.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue th’offender. How dost, my lord?

GLOUCESTER.
O madam, my old heart is crack’d, it’s crack’d!

REGAN.
What, did my father’s godson seek your life?
He whom my father nam’d? your Edgar?

GLOUCESTER.
O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!

REGAN.
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
That tend upon my father?

GLOUCESTER.
I know not, madam; ’tis too bad, too bad.

EDMUND.
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.

REGAN.
No marvel then though he were ill affected:
’Tis they have put him on the old man’s death,
To have the expense and waste of his revenues.
I have this present evening from my sister
Been well inform’d of them; and with such cautions
That if they come to sojourn at my house,
I’ll not be there.

CORNWALL.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
A childlike office.

EDMUND.
It was my duty, sir.

GLOUCESTER.
He did bewray his practice; and receiv’d
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

CORNWALL.
Is he pursued?

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, my good lord.

CORNWALL.
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be fear’d of doing harm: make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
You we first seize on.

EDMUND.
I shall serve you, sir, truly, however else.

GLOUCESTER.
For him I thank your grace.

CORNWALL.
You know not why we came to visit you?

REGAN.
Thus out of season, threading dark-ey’d night:
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
Wherein we must have use of your advice.
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I best thought it fit
To answer from our home; the several messengers
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow
Your needful counsel to our business,
Which craves the instant use.

GLOUCESTER.
I serve you, madam:
Your graces are right welcome.

 [_Exeunt. Flourish._]

SCENE II. Before Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Kent and Oswald,
severally.

OSWALD.
Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?

KENT.
Ay.

OSWALD.
Where may we set our horses?

KENT.
I’ the mire.

OSWALD.
Prythee, if thou lov’st me, tell me.

KENT.
I love thee not.

OSWALD.
Why then, I care not for thee.

KENT.
If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee care for me.

OSWALD.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.

KENT.
Fellow, I know thee.

OSWALD.
What dost thou know me for?

KENT.
A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking, whoreson,
glass-gazing, super-serviceable, finical rogue;
one trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
good service, and art nothing but the composition of a
knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel
bitch: one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou
deniest the least syllable of thy addition.

OSWALD.
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that’s
neither known of thee nor knows thee?

KENT.
What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me! Is
it two days ago since I tripped up thy heels and beat thee before
the King? Draw, you rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon
shines; I’ll make a sop o’ the moonshine of you: draw, you
whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw!

 [_Drawing his sword._]

OSWALD.
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.

KENT.
Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the King; and
take vanity the puppet’s part against the royalty of her father:
draw, you rogue, or I’ll so carbonado your shanks:—draw, you rascal;
come your ways!

OSWALD.
Help, ho! murder! help!

KENT.
Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat slave, strike!

 [_Beating him._]

OSWALD.
Help, ho! murder! murder!

 Enter Edmund, Cornwall, Regan,
Gloucester and Servants.

EDMUND.
How now! What’s the matter? Part!

KENT.
With you, goodman boy, if you please: come, I’ll flesh ye; come
on, young master.

GLOUCESTER.
Weapons! arms! What’s the matter here?

CORNWALL.
Keep peace, upon your lives, he dies that strikes again. What is the
matter?

REGAN.
The messengers from our sister and the King.

CORNWALL.
What is your difference? Speak.

OSWALD.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.

KENT.
No marvel, you have so bestirr’d your valour. You cowardly
rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.

CORNWALL.
Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?

KENT.
Ay, a tailor, sir: a stonecutter or a painter could not have
made him so ill, though he had been but two years at the trade.

CORNWALL.
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?

OSWALD.
This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his grey
beard,—

KENT.
Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if you’ll
give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into mortar and
daub the walls of a jakes with him. Spare my grey beard, you wagtail?

CORNWALL.
Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?

KENT.
Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.

CORNWALL.
Why art thou angry?

KENT.
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain
Which are too intrince t’unloose; smooth every passion
That in the natures of their lords rebel;
Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.
A plague upon your epileptic visage!
Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
I’d drive ye cackling home to Camelot.

CORNWALL.
What, art thou mad, old fellow?

GLOUCESTER.
How fell you out? Say that.

KENT.
No contraries hold more antipathy
Than I and such a knave.

CORNWALL.
Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?

KENT.
His countenance likes me not.

CORNWALL.
No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.

KENT.
Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:
I have seen better faces in my time
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.

CORNWALL.
This is some fellow
Who, having been prais’d for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
An they will take it, so; if not, he’s plain.
These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly-ducking observants
That stretch their duties nicely.

KENT.
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under th’allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
On flickering Phoebus’ front,—

CORNWALL.
What mean’st by this?

KENT.
To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I know,
sir, I am no flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain accent
was a plain knave; which, for my part, I will not be, though I
should win your displeasure to entreat me to’t.

CORNWALL.
What was the offence you gave him?

OSWALD.
I never gave him any:
It pleas’d the King his master very late
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
When he, compact, and flattering his displeasure,
Tripp’d me behind; being down, insulted, rail’d
And put upon him such a deal of man,
That worthied him, got praises of the King
For him attempting who was self-subdu’d;
And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.

KENT.
None of these rogues and cowards
But Ajax is their fool.

CORNWALL.
Fetch forth the stocks!
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
We’ll teach you.

KENT.
Sir, I am too old to learn:
Call not your stocks for me: I serve the King;
On whose employment I was sent to you:
You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
Against the grace and person of my master,
Stocking his messenger.

CORNWALL.
Fetch forth the stocks!
As I have life and honour, there shall he sit till noon.

REGAN.
Till noon! Till night, my lord; and all night too!

KENT.
Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog,
You should not use me so.

REGAN.
Sir, being his knave, I will.

 [_Stocks brought out._]

CORNWALL.
This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!

GLOUCESTER.
Let me beseech your grace not to do so:
His fault is much, and the good King his master
Will check him for’t: your purpos’d low correction
Is such as basest and contemned’st wretches
For pilferings and most common trespasses,
Are punish’d with. The King must take it ill
That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.

CORNWALL.
I’ll answer that.

REGAN.
My sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her gentleman abus’d, assaulted,
For following her affairs. Put in his legs.

 [_Kent is put in the
stocks._]

CORNWALL.
Come, my good lord, away.

 [_Exeunt all but Gloucester and Kent._]

GLOUCESTER.
I am sorry for thee, friend; ’tis the Duke’s pleasure,
Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
Will not be rubb’d nor stopp’d; I’ll entreat for thee.

KENT.
Pray do not, sir: I have watch’d, and travell’d hard;
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I’ll whistle.
A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels:
Give you good morrow!

GLOUCESTER.
The Duke’s to blame in this: ’twill be ill taken.

 [_Exit._]

KENT.
Good King, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st
To the warm sun.
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been inform’d
Of my obscured course. And shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and o’erwatch’d,
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging.
Fortune, good night: smile once more, turn thy wheel!

 [_He sleeps._]

SCENE III. The open Country

 Enter Edgar.

EDGAR.
I heard myself proclaim’d,
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escap’d the hunt. No port is free, no place
That guard and most unusual vigilance
Does not attend my taking. While I may scape
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape
That ever penury in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast: my face I’ll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins; elf all my hair in knots,
And with presented nakedness outface
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numb’d and mortified bare arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom,
That’s something yet: Edgar I nothing am.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Before Gloucester’s Castle; Kent in the stocks

 Enter Lear, Fool and Gentleman.

LEAR.
’Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
And not send back my messenger.

GENTLEMAN.
As I learn’d,
The night before there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.

KENT.
Hail to thee, noble master!

LEAR.
Ha! Mak’st thou this shame thy pastime?

KENT.
No, my lord.

FOOL.
Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
heads; dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by the loins, and
men by the legs: when a man is overlusty at legs, then he
wears wooden nether-stocks.

LEAR.
What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?

KENT.
It is both he and she,
Your son and daughter.

LEAR.
No.

KENT.
Yes.

LEAR.
No, I say.

KENT.
I say, yea.

LEAR.
No, no; they would not.

KENT.
Yes, they have.

LEAR.
By Jupiter, I swear no.

KENT.
By Juno, I swear ay.

LEAR.
They durst not do’t.
They could not, would not do’t; ’tis worse than murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage:
Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way
Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
Coming from us.

KENT.
My lord, when at their home
I did commend your highness’ letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that show’d
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stew’d in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Deliver’d letters, spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on those contents,
They summon’d up their meiny, straight took horse;
Commanded me to follow and attend
The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome I perceiv’d had poison’d mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Display’d so saucily against your highness,
Having more man than wit about me, drew;
He rais’d the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.

FOOL.
Winter’s not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.
  Fathers that wear rags
    Do make their children blind,
  But fathers that bear bags
    Shall see their children kind.
  Fortune, that arrant whore,
  Ne’er turns the key to th’ poor.
But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
daughters as thou canst tell in a year.

LEAR.
O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
_Hysterica passio_, down, thou climbing sorrow,
Thy element’s below! Where is this daughter?

KENT.
With the earl, sir, here within.

LEAR.
Follow me not; stay here.

 [_Exit._]

GENTLEMAN.
Made you no more offence but what you speak of?

KENT.
None.
How chance the King comes with so small a number?

FOOL.
An thou hadst been set i’ the stocks for that question,
thou hadst well deserved it.

KENT.
Why, fool?

FOOL.
We’ll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there’s no
labouring i’the winter. All that follow their noses are led by
their eyes but blind men; and there’s not a nose among twenty
but can smell him that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great
wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I
would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
          That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
             And follows but for form,
          Will pack when it begins to rain,
             And leave thee in the storm.
          But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
             And let the wise man fly:
          The knave turns fool that runs away;
             The fool no knave perdy.
    

KENT.
Where learn’d you this, fool?

FOOL.
Not i’ the stocks, fool.

 Enter Lear and Gloucester.

LEAR.
Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
They have travell’d all the night? Mere fetches;
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.

GLOUCESTER.
My dear lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke;
How unremovable and fix’d he is
In his own course.

LEAR.
Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
I’d speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

GLOUCESTER.
Well, my good lord, I have inform’d them so.

LEAR.
Inform’d them! Dost thou understand me, man?

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, my good lord.

LEAR.
The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends, service,
Are they inform’d of this? My breath and blood!
Fiery? The fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that—
No, but not yet: maybe he is not well:
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
Whereto our health is bound: we are not ourselves
When nature, being oppress’d, commands the mind
To suffer with the body: I’ll forbear;
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indispos’d and sickly fit
For the sound man. [_Looking on Kent._]
Death on my state! Wherefore
Should he sit here? This act persuades me
That this remotion of the Duke and her
Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
Go tell the Duke and’s wife I’d speak with them,
Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber door I’ll beat the drum
Till it cry sleep to death.

GLOUCESTER.
I would have all well betwixt you.

 [_Exit._]

LEAR.
O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down!

FOOL.
Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put ’em
i’ the paste alive; she knapped ’em o’ the coxcombs
with a stick and cried ‘Down, wantons, down!’ ’Twas
her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse buttered his hay.

 Enter Cornwall, Regan,
Gloucester and Servants.

LEAR.
Good morrow to you both.

CORNWALL.
Hail to your grace!

 [_Kent here set at liberty._]

REGAN.
I am glad to see your highness.

LEAR.
Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb,
Sepulchring an adultress. [_To Kent_] O, are you free?
Some other time for that.—Beloved Regan,
Thy sister’s naught: O Regan, she hath tied
Sharp-tooth’d unkindness, like a vulture, here.

 [_Points to his heart._]

I can scarce speak to thee; thou’lt not believe
With how deprav’d a quality—O Regan!

REGAN.
I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
You less know how to value her desert
Than she to scant her duty.

LEAR.
Say, how is that?

REGAN.
I cannot think my sister in the least
Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
She have restrain’d the riots of your followers,
’Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
As clears her from all blame.

LEAR.
My curses on her.

REGAN.
O, sir, you are old;
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Of her confine: you should be rul’d and led
By some discretion, that discerns your state
Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you,
That to our sister you do make return;
Say you have wrong’d her, sir.

LEAR.
Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house?
‘Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
[_Kneeling._]
Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg
That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.’

REGAN.
Good sir, no more! These are unsightly tricks:
Return you to my sister.

LEAR.
[_Rising._] Never, Regan:
She hath abated me of half my train;
Look’d black upon me; struck me with her tongue,
Most serpent-like, upon the very heart.
All the stor’d vengeances of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lameness!

CORNWALL.
Fie, sir, fie!

LEAR.
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
You fen-suck’d fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,
To fall and blast her pride!

REGAN.
O the blest gods!
So will you wish on me when the rash mood is on.

LEAR.
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
Thee o’er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce; but thine
Do comfort, and not burn. ’Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know’st
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;
Thy half o’ the kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endow’d.

REGAN.
Good sir, to the purpose.

LEAR.
Who put my man i’ the stocks?

 [_Tucket within._]

CORNWALL.
What trumpet’s that?

REGAN.
I know’t, my sister’s: this approves her letter,
That she would soon be here.

 Enter Oswald.

Is your lady come?

LEAR.
This is a slave, whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
Out, varlet, from my sight!

CORNWALL.
What means your grace?

LEAR.
Who stock’d my servant? Regan, I have good hope
Thou didst not know on’t. Who comes here? O heavens!

 Enter Goneril.

If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,
Make it your cause; send down, and take my part!
[_To Goneril._] Art not asham’d to look upon this beard?
O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?

GONERIL.
Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
All’s not offence that indiscretion finds
And dotage terms so.

LEAR.
O sides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold? How came my man i’ the stocks?

CORNWALL.
I set him there, sir: but his own disorders
Deserv’d much less advancement.

LEAR.
You? Did you?

REGAN.
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
If, till the expiration of your month,
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
I am now from home, and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

LEAR.
Return to her, and fifty men dismiss’d?
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity o’ the air;
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,
Necessity’s sharp pinch! Return with her?
Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.

 [_Pointing to Oswald._]

GONERIL.
At your choice, sir.

LEAR.
I prythee, daughter, do not make me mad:
I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
We’ll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
Or rather a disease that’s in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,
A plague sore, or embossed carbuncle
In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee;
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:
I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:
Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:
I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred knights.

REGAN.
Not altogether so,
I look’d not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Must be content to think you old, and so—
But she knows what she does.

LEAR.
Is this well spoken?

REGAN.
I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
Speak ’gainst so great a number? How in one house
Should many people, under two commands,
Hold amity? ’Tis hard; almost impossible.

GONERIL.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls servants, or from mine?

REGAN.
Why not, my lord? If then they chanc’d to slack ye,
We could control them. If you will come to me,—
For now I spy a danger,—I entreat you
To bring but five-and-twenty: to no more
Will I give place or notice.

LEAR.
I gave you all,—

REGAN.
And in good time you gave it.

LEAR.
Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number. What, must I come to you
With five-and-twenty, Regan, said you so?

REGAN.
And speak’t again my lord; no more with me.

LEAR.
Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour’d
When others are more wicked; not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise.
[_To Goneril._] I’ll go with thee:
Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
And thou art twice her love.

GONERIL.
Hear me, my lord:
What need you five-and-twenty? Ten? Or five?
To follow in a house where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?

REGAN.
What need one?

LEAR.
O, reason not the need: our basest beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man’s life is cheap as beast’s. Thou art a lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear’st
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need,—
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
As full of grief as age; wretched in both!
If it be you that stirs these daughters’ hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
And let not women’s weapons, water-drops,
Stain my man’s cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on you both
That all the world shall,—I will do such things,—
What they are yet, I know not; but they shall be
The terrors of the earth. You think I’ll weep;
No, I’ll not weep:— [_Storm and tempest._]
I have full cause of weeping; but this heart
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
Or ere I’ll weep.—O fool, I shall go mad!

 [_Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent and Fool._]

CORNWALL.
Let us withdraw; ’twill be a storm.

REGAN.
This house is little: the old man and his people
Cannot be well bestow’d.

GONERIL.
’Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest
And must needs taste his folly.

REGAN.
For his particular, I’ll receive him gladly,
But not one follower.

GONERIL.
So am I purpos’d.
Where is my lord of Gloucester?

 Enter Gloucester.

CORNWALL.
Followed the old man forth, he is return’d.

GLOUCESTER.
The King is in high rage.

CORNWALL.
Whither is he going?

GLOUCESTER.
He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.

CORNWALL.
’Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.

GONERIL.
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, the night comes on, and the high winds
Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about
There’s scarce a bush.

REGAN.
O, sir, to wilful men
The injuries that they themselves procure
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abus’d, wisdom bids fear.

CORNWALL.
Shut up your doors, my lord; ’tis a wild night.
My Regan counsels well: come out o’ the storm.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A Heath


 A storm with thunder and lightning. Enter Kent and a Gentleman,
severally.

KENT.
Who’s there, besides foul weather?

GENTLEMAN.
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.

KENT.
I know you. Where’s the King?

GENTLEMAN.
Contending with the fretful elements;
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
Or swell the curled waters ’bove the main,
That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts with eyeless rage,
Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
And bids what will take all.

KENT.
But who is with him?

GENTLEMAN.
None but the fool, who labours to out-jest
His heart-struck injuries.

KENT.
Sir, I do know you;
And dare, upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Although as yet the face of it be cover’d
With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall;
Who have, as who have not, that their great stars
Throne’d and set high; servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes;
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Against the old kind King; or something deeper,
Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings;—
But, true it is, from France there comes a power
Into this scatter’d kingdom; who already,
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports, and are at point
To show their open banner.—Now to you:
If on my credit you dare build so far
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you making just report
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The King hath cause to plain.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;
And from some knowledge and assurance
Offer this office to you.

GENTLEMAN.
I will talk further with you.

KENT.
No, do not.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take
What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,
As fear not but you shall, show her this ring;
And she will tell you who your fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
I will go seek the King.

GENTLEMAN.
Give me your hand: have you no more to say?

KENT.
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
That, when we have found the King, in which your pain
That way, I’ll this; he that first lights on him
Holla the other.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Another part of the heath

 Storm continues. Enter Lear
and Fool.

LEAR.
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage! blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drench’d our steeples, drown’d the cocks!
You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,
Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o’ the world!
Crack nature’s moulds, all germens spill at once,
That make ingrateful man!

FOOL.
O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry house is better than this
rain-water out o’ door. Good nuncle, in; and ask thy daughters
blessing: here’s a night pities neither wise men nor fools.

LEAR.
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters;
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
I never gave you kingdom, call’d you children;
You owe me no subscription: then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and despis’d old man:
But yet I call you servile ministers,
That will with two pernicious daughters join
Your high-engender’d battles ’gainst a head
So old and white as this! O! O! ’tis foul!

FOOL.
He that has a house to put’s head in has a good head-piece.
   The codpiece that will house
     Before the head has any,
   The head and he shall louse:
     So beggars marry many.
   The man that makes his toe
     What he his heart should make
   Shall of a corn cry woe,
     And turn his sleep to wake.
For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.

LEAR.
No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
I will say nothing.

 Enter Kent.

KENT.
Who’s there?

FOOL.
Marry, here’s grace and a codpiece; that’s a wise man and a
fool.

KENT.
Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never
Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry
Th’affliction, nor the fear.

LEAR.
Let the great gods,
That keep this dreadful pudder o’er our heads,
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
That hast within thee undivulged crimes
Unwhipp’d of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand;
Thou perjur’d, and thou simular of virtue
That art incestuous. Caitiff, to pieces shake
That under covert and convenient seeming
Hast practis’d on man’s life: close pent-up guilts,
Rive your concealing continents, and cry
These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
More sinn’d against than sinning.

KENT.
Alack, bareheaded!
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
Some friendship will it lend you ’gainst the tempest:
Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house,—
More harder than the stones whereof ’tis rais’d;
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in,—return, and force
Their scanted courtesy.

LEAR.
My wits begin to turn.
Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities is strange,
That can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel.
Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
That’s sorry yet for thee.

FOOL.
[_Singing._]
   He that has and a little tiny wit,
     With heigh-ho, the wind and the rain,
   Must make content with his fortunes fit,
     Though the rain it raineth every day.

LEAR.
True, boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.

 [_Exeunt Lear and Kent._]

FOOL.
This is a brave night to cool a courtezan. I’ll speak a prophecy
ere I go:
   When priests are more in word than matter;
   When brewers mar their malt with water;
   When nobles are their tailors’ tutors;
   No heretics burn’d, but wenches’ suitors;
   When every case in law is right;
   No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
   When slanders do not live in tongues;
   Nor cut-purses come not to throngs;
   When usurers tell their gold i’ the field;
   And bawds and whores do churches build,
   Then shall the realm of Albion
   Come to great confusion:
   Then comes the time, who lives to see’t,
   That going shall be us’d with feet.
This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Gloucester and Edmund.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing. When I
desired their leave that I might pity him, they took from me the
use of mine own house; charged me on pain of perpetual displeasure,
neither to speak of him, entreat for him, or any way sustain him.

EDMUND.
Most savage and unnatural!

GLOUCESTER.
Go to; say you nothing. There is division between the Dukes,
and a worse matter than that: I have received a letter this
night;—’tis dangerous to be spoken;—I have locked the letter
in my closet: these injuries the King now bears will be revenged
home; there’s part of a power already footed: we must incline to
the King. I will look him, and privily relieve him: go you and
maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him
perceived: if he ask for me, I am ill, and gone to bed. If I
die for it, as no less is threatened me, the King my old master
must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward, Edmund;
pray you be careful.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
Instantly know; and of that letter too.
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
That which my father loses, no less than all:
The younger rises when the old doth fall.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. A part of the Heath with a Hovel

 Storm continues. Enter Lear,
Kent and Fool.

KENT.
Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:
The tyranny of the open night’s too rough
For nature to endure.

LEAR.
Let me alone.

KENT.
Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR.
Wilt break my heart?

KENT.
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.

LEAR.
Thou think’st ’tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin: so ’tis to thee,
But where the greater malady is fix’d,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou’dst shun a bear;
But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Thou’dst meet the bear i’ the mouth. When the mind’s
free,
The body’s delicate: the tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to’t? But I will punish home;
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure:
In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,
O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
No more of that.

KENT.
Good my lord, enter here.

LEAR.
Prythee go in thyself; seek thine own ease:
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But I’ll go in.
[_To the Fool._] In, boy; go first. You houseless poverty,
Nay, get thee in. I’ll pray, and then I’ll sleep.

 [_Fool goes in._]

Poor naked wretches, wheresoe’er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your loop’d and window’d raggedness, defend you
From seasons such as these? O, I have ta’en
Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them
And show the heavens more just.

EDGAR.
[_Within._] Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!

 [_The Fool runs out from the hovel._]

FOOL.
Come not in here, nuncle, here’s a spirit.
Help me, help me!

KENT.
Give me thy hand. Who’s there?

FOOL.
A spirit, a spirit: he says his name’s poor Tom.

KENT.
What art thou that dost grumble there i’ the straw?
Come forth.

 Enter Edgar, disguised as a
madman.

EDGAR.
Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn blows the
cold wind. Humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.

LEAR.
Didst thou give all to thy two daughters?
And art thou come to this?

EDGAR.
Who gives anything to poor Tom? Whom the foul fiend hath led
through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool, o’er
bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and
halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge; made him proud
of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horse over four-inched
bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five
wits! 	Tom’s a-cold. O, do, de, do, de, do, de. Bless thee from
whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some charity,
whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now, and
there,—and there again, and there.

 [_Storm continues._]

LEAR.
What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give ’em all?

FOOL.
Nay, he reserv’d a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

LEAR.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o’er men’s faults light on thy daughters!

KENT.
He hath no daughters, sir.

LEAR.
Death, traitor! nothing could have subdu’d nature
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Judicious punishment! ’twas this flesh begot
Those pelican daughters.

EDGAR.
   Pillicock sat on Pillicock hill,
     Alow, alow, loo loo!

FOOL.
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.

EDGAR.
Take heed o’ th’ foul fiend: obey thy parents; keep thy word
justly; swear not; commit not with man’s sworn spouse; set not
thy sweet-heart on proud array. Tom’s a-cold.

LEAR.
What hast thou been?

EDGAR.
A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that curled my hair;
wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of my mistress’ heart, and
did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake
words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven. One that
slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it. Wine loved
I deeply, dice dearly; and in woman out-paramour’d the Turk.
False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox
in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray
thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand
out of plackets, thy pen from lender’s book, and defy the foul
fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind: says
suum, mun, nonny. Dolphin my boy, boy, sessa! let him trot by.

 [_Storm still continues._]

LEAR.
Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered
body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more than this? Consider
him well. Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no
wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! here’s three on’s are
sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself: unaccommodated man is no more
but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you
lendings! Come, unbutton here.

 [_Tears off his clothes._]

FOOL.
Prythee, nuncle, be contented; ’tis a naughty night to swim
in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher’s
heart, a small spark, all the rest on’s body cold. Look, here
comes a walking fire.

EDGAR.
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins at curfew, and walks
till the first cock; he gives the web and the pin, squints the eye, and
makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature
of earth.
   Swithold footed thrice the old;
   He met the nightmare, and her nine-fold;
     Bid her alight and her troth plight,
   And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

KENT.
How fares your grace?

 Enter Gloucester with a
torch.

LEAR.
What’s he?

KENT.
Who’s there? What is’t you seek?

GLOUCESTER.
What are you there? Your names?

EDGAR.
Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole, the
wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the
foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets; swallows the old rat
and the ditch-dog; drinks the green mantle of the standing pool;
who is whipped from tithing to tithing, and stocked, punished,
and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts
to his body,
     Horse to ride, and weapon to wear.
     But mice and rats and such small deer,
     Have been Tom’s food for seven long year.
Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!

GLOUCESTER.
What, hath your grace no better company?

EDGAR.
The prince of darkness is a gentleman:
Modo he’s call’d, and Mahu.

GLOUCESTER.
Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile
That it doth hate what gets it.

EDGAR.
Poor Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER.
Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer
T’obey in all your daughters’ hard commands;
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventur’d to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.

LEAR.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
What is the cause of thunder?

KENT.
Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.

LEAR.
I’ll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
What is your study?

EDGAR.
How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.

LEAR.
Let me ask you one word in private.

KENT.
Importune him once more to go, my lord;
His wits begin t’unsettle.

GLOUCESTER.
Canst thou blame him?
His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banish’d man!
Thou sayest the King grows mad; I’ll tell thee, friend,
I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
Now outlaw’d from my blood; he sought my life
But lately, very late: I lov’d him, friend,
No father his son dearer: true to tell thee,

 [_Storm continues._]

The grief hath craz’d my wits. What a night’s this!
I do beseech your grace.

LEAR.
O, cry you mercy, sir.
Noble philosopher, your company.

EDGAR.
Tom’s a-cold.

GLOUCESTER.
In, fellow, there, into the hovel; keep thee warm.

LEAR.
Come, let’s in all.

KENT.
This way, my lord.

LEAR.
With him;
I will keep still with my philosopher.

KENT.
Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.

GLOUCESTER.
Take him you on.

KENT.
Sirrah, come on; go along with us.

LEAR.
Come, good Athenian.

GLOUCESTER.
No words, no words, hush.

EDGAR.
   Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
   His word was still—Fie, foh, and fum,
   I smell the blood of a British man.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Cornwall and Edmund.

CORNWALL.
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.

EDMUND.
How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to
loyalty, something fears me to think of.

CORNWALL.
I now perceive it was not altogether your brother’s evil
disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set
a-work by a reproveable badness in himself.

EDMUND.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just! This
is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent
party to the advantages of France. O heavens! that this treason
were not; or not I the detector!

CORNWALL.
Go with me to the Duchess.

EDMUND.
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business
in hand.

CORNWALL.
True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester. Seek out
where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.

EDMUND.
[_Aside._] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his
suspicion more fully. I will persever in my course of loyalty,
though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.

CORNWALL.
I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a dearer father
in my love.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. A Chamber in a Farmhouse adjoining the Castle

 Enter Gloucester, Lear, Kent,
Fool and Edgar.

GLOUCESTER.
Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will
piece out the comfort with what addition I can: I will not be
long from you.

KENT.
All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience:—
the gods reward your kindness!

 [_Exit Gloucester._]

EDGAR.
Frateretto calls me; and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake
of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.

FOOL.
Prythee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
yeoman.

LEAR.
A king, a king!

FOOL.
No, he’s a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for he’s a mad
yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.

LEAR.
To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hissing in upon ’em.

EDGAR.
The foul fiend bites my back.

FOOL.
He’s mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse’s health,
a boy’s love, or a whore’s oath.

LEAR.
It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
[_To Edgar._] Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;
[_To the Fool._] Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she-foxes!—

EDGAR.
Look, where he stands and glares! Want’st thou eyes at trial, madam?
  Come o’er the bourn, Bessy, to me.

FOOL.
   Her boat hath a leak,
   And she must not speak
   Why she dares not come over to thee.

EDGAR.
The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
Hoppedance cries in Tom’s belly for two white herring. Croak not, black
angel; I have no food for thee.

KENT.
How do you, sir? Stand you not so amaz’d;
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?

LEAR.
I’ll see their trial first. Bring in their evidence.
[_To Edgar._] Thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
[_To the Fool._] And thou, his yokefellow of equity,
Bench by his side. [_To Kent._] You are o’ the commission,
Sit you too.

EDGAR.
   Let us deal justly.
   Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
     Thy sheep be in the corn;
   And for one blast of thy minikin mouth
     Thy sheep shall take no harm.
Purr! the cat is grey.

LEAR.
Arraign her first; ’tis Goneril. I here take my oath before
this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor King her father.

FOOL.
Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?

LEAR.
She cannot deny it.

FOOL.
Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.

LEAR.
And here’s another, whose warp’d looks proclaim
What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
Arms, arms! sword! fire! Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why hast thou let her ’scape?

EDGAR.
Bless thy five wits!

KENT.
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
That you so oft have boasted to retain?

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] My tears begin to take his part so much
They mar my counterfeiting.

LEAR.
The little dogs and all,
Trey, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.

EDGAR.
Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
   Be thy mouth or black or white,
   Tooth that poisons if it bite;
   Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
   Hound or spaniel, brach or him,
   Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,
   Tom will make them weep and wail;
   For, with throwing thus my head,
   Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
Do, de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs and market towns.
Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.

LEAR.
Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds about her
heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
hearts? [_To Edgar._] You, sir, I entertain you for one of my
hundred; only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You’ll
say they are Persian; but let them be changed.

KENT.
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.

LEAR.
Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
So, so. We’ll go to supper i’ the morning.

FOOL.
And I’ll go to bed at noon.

 Enter Gloucester.

GLOUCESTER.
Come hither, friend;
Where is the King my master?

KENT.
Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.

GLOUCESTER.
Good friend, I prythee, take him in thy arms;
I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him;
There is a litter ready; lay him in’t
And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master;
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up;
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.

KENT.
Oppressed nature sleeps.
This rest might yet have balm’d thy broken sinews,
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Stand in hard cure. Come, help to bear thy master;
[_To the Fool._] Thou must not stay behind.

GLOUCESTER.
Come, come, away!

 [_Exeunt Kent, Gloucester and the Fool bearing off Lear._]

EDGAR.
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers, suffers most i’ the mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind:
But then the mind much sufferance doth o’erskip
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend makes the King bow;
He childed as I fathered! Tom, away!
Mark the high noises; and thyself bewray,
When false opinion, whose wrong thoughts defile thee,
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight, safe ’scape the King!
Lurk, lurk.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE VII. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril,
Edmund and Servants.

CORNWALL.
Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him this letter: the army
of France is landed. Seek out the traitor Gloucester.

 [_Exeunt some of the Servants._]

REGAN.
Hang him instantly.

GONERIL.
Pluck out his eyes.

CORNWALL.
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our sister
company: the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous
father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke where you
are going, to a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the
like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.
Farewell, dear sister, farewell, my lord of Gloucester.

 Enter Oswald.

How now! Where’s the King?

OSWALD.
My lord of Gloucester hath convey’d him hence:
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
Who, with some other of the lord’s dependants,
Are gone with him toward Dover: where they boast
To have well-armed friends.

CORNWALL.
Get horses for your mistress.

GONERIL.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.

CORNWALL.
Edmund, farewell.

 [_Exeunt Goneril, Edmund and Oswald._]

Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.

 [_Exeunt other Servants._]

Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not control. Who’s there? The traitor?

 Enter Gloucester
and Servants.

REGAN.
Ingrateful fox! ’tis he.

CORNWALL.
Bind fast his corky arms.

GLOUCESTER.
What mean your graces?
Good my friends, consider you are my guests.
Do me no foul play, friends.

CORNWALL.
Bind him, I say.

 [_Servants bind him._]

REGAN.
Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!

GLOUCESTER.
Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none.

CORNWALL.
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find—

 [_Regan plucks his beard._]

GLOUCESTER.
By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done
To pluck me by the beard.

REGAN.
So white, and such a traitor!

GLOUCESTER.
Naughty lady,
These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken, and accuse thee. I am your host:
With robber’s hands my hospitable favours
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?

CORNWALL.
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?

REGAN.
Be simple answer’d, for we know the truth.

CORNWALL.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors,
Late footed in the kingdom?

REGAN.
To whose hands have you sent the lunatic King?
Speak.

GLOUCESTER.
I have a letter guessingly set down,
Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,
And not from one oppos’d.

CORNWALL.
Cunning.

REGAN.
And false.

CORNWALL.
Where hast thou sent the King?

GLOUCESTER.
To Dover.

REGAN.
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charg’d at peril,—

CORNWALL.
Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.

GLOUCESTER.
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.

REGAN.
Wherefore to Dover, sir?

GLOUCESTER.
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
In hell-black night endur’d, would have buoy’d up,
And quench’d the stelled fires;
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
If wolves had at thy gate howl’d that stern time,
Thou shouldst have said, ‘Good porter, turn the key.’
All cruels else subscrib’d: but I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.

CORNWALL.
See’t shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.

 [_Gloucester is held down in his chair, while Cornwall plucks out one
 of his eyes and sets his foot on it._]

GLOUCESTER.
He that will think to live till he be old,
Give me some help!—O cruel! O you gods!

REGAN.
One side will mock another; the other too!

CORNWALL.
If you see vengeance—

FIRST SERVANT.
Hold your hand, my lord:
I have serv’d you ever since I was a child;
But better service have I never done you
Than now to bid you hold.

REGAN.
How now, you dog!

FIRST SERVANT.
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I’d shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?

CORNWALL.
My villain?

 [_Draws, and runs at him._]

FIRST SERVANT.
Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.

 [_Draws. They fight. Cornwall is wounded._]

REGAN.
[_To another servant._] Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?

 [_Snatches a sword, comes behind, and stabs him._]

FIRST SERVANT.
O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
To see some mischief on him. O!

 [_Dies._]

CORNWALL.
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
Where is thy lustre now?

 [_Tears out Gloucester’s other eye and throws it on the ground._]

GLOUCESTER.
All dark and comfortless. Where’s my son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
To quit this horrid act.

REGAN.
Out, treacherous villain!
Thou call’st on him that hates thee: it was he
That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
Who is too good to pity thee.

GLOUCESTER.
O my follies! Then Edgar was abus’d.
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!

REGAN.
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover. How is’t, my lord? How look you?

CORNWALL.
I have receiv’d a hurt: follow me, lady.
Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:
Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.

 [_Exit Cornwall, led by Regan; Servants unbind Gloucester and lead
 him out._]

SECOND SERVANT.
I’ll never care what wickedness I do,
If this man come to good.

THIRD SERVANT.
If she live long,
And in the end meet the old course of death,
Women will all turn monsters.

SECOND SERVANT.
Let’s follow the old Earl, and get the bedlam
To lead him where he would: his roguish madness
Allows itself to anything.

THIRD SERVANT.
Go thou: I’ll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. The heath


 Enter Edgar.

EDGAR.
Yet better thus, and known to be contemn’d,
Than still contemn’d and flatter’d. To be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
The lamentable change is from the best;
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace;
The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
Owes nothing to thy blasts.

 Enter Gloucester, led by an
Old Man.

But who comes here? My father, poorly led?
World, world, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.

OLD MAN.
O my good lord, I have been your tenant, and your father’s tenant
these fourscore years.

GLOUCESTER.
Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone.
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
Thee they may hurt.

OLD MAN.
You cannot see your way.

GLOUCESTER.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused father’s wrath!
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
I’d say I had eyes again!

OLD MAN.
How now! Who’s there?

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] O gods! Who is’t can say ‘I am at the
worst’?
I am worse than e’er I was.

OLD MAN.
’Tis poor mad Tom.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] And worse I may be yet. The worst is not
So long as we can say ‘This is the worst.’

OLD MAN.
Fellow, where goest?

GLOUCESTER.
Is it a beggar-man?

OLD MAN.
Madman, and beggar too.

GLOUCESTER.
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
I’ the last night’s storm I such a fellow saw;
Which made me think a man a worm. My son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him.
I have heard more since.
As flies to wanton boys are we to the gods,
They kill us for their sport.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] How should this be?
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
Angering itself and others. Bless thee, master!

GLOUCESTER.
Is that the naked fellow?

OLD MAN.
Ay, my lord.

GLOUCESTER.
Then prythee get thee away. If for my sake
Thou wilt o’ertake us hence a mile or twain,
I’ the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Which I’ll entreat to lead me.

OLD MAN.
Alack, sir, he is mad.

GLOUCESTER.
’Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;
Above the rest, be gone.

OLD MAN.
I’ll bring him the best ’parel that I have,
Come on’t what will.

 [_Exit._]

GLOUCESTER.
Sirrah naked fellow.

EDGAR.
Poor Tom’s a-cold.
[_Aside._] I cannot daub it further.

GLOUCESTER.
Come hither, fellow.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] And yet I must. Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.

GLOUCESTER.
Know’st thou the way to Dover?

EDGAR.
Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been
scared out of his good wits. Bless thee, good man’s son, from
the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of
lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of darkness; Mahu, of
stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and
mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women. So,
bless thee, master!

GLOUCESTER.
Here, take this purse, thou whom the heaven’s plagues
Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier. Heavens deal so still!
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly;
So distribution should undo excess,
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

EDGAR.
Ay, master.

GLOUCESTER.
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined deep:
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me: from that place
I shall no leading need.

EDGAR.
Give me thy arm:
Poor Tom shall lead thee.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Before the Duke of Albany’s Palace

 Enter Goneril, Edmund;
Oswald meeting them.

GONERIL.
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way. Now, where’s your master?

OSWALD.
Madam, within; but never man so chang’d.
I told him of the army that was landed;
He smil’d at it: I told him you were coming;
His answer was, ‘The worse.’ Of Gloucester’s treachery
And of the loyal service of his son
When I inform’d him, then he call’d me sot,
And told me I had turn’d the wrong side out.
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.

GONERIL.
[_To Edmund._] Then shall you go no further.
It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;
Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.
I must change names at home, and give the distaff
Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant
Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear,
If you dare venture in your own behalf,
A mistress’s command. [_Giving a favour._]
Wear this; spare speech;
Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
Conceive, and fare thee well.

EDMUND.
Yours in the ranks of death.

 [_Exit Edmund._]

GONERIL.
My most dear Gloucester.
O, the difference of man and man!
To thee a woman’s services are due;
My fool usurps my body.

OSWALD.
Madam, here comes my lord.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Albany.

GONERIL.
I have been worth the whistle.

ALBANY.
O Goneril!
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face! I fear your disposition;
That nature which contemns its origin
Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must wither
And come to deadly use.

GONERIL.
No more; the text is foolish.

ALBANY.
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform’d?
A father, and a gracious aged man,
Whose reverence even the head-lugg’d bear would lick,
Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him so benefitted!
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
It will come,
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.

GONERIL.
Milk-liver’d man!
That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know’st
Fools do those villains pity who are punish’d
Ere they have done their mischief. Where’s thy drum?
France spreads his banners in our noiseless land;
With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
Whilst thou, a moral fool, sitt’st still, and criest
‘Alack, why does he so?’

ALBANY.
See thyself, devil!
Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.

GONERIL.
O vain fool!

ALBANY.
Thou changed and self-cover’d thing, for shame!
Be-monster not thy feature! Were’t my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones. Howe’er thou art a fiend,
A woman’s shape doth shield thee.

GONERIL.
Marry, your manhood, mew!

 Enter a Messenger.

ALBANY.
What news?

MESSENGER.
O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead;
Slain by his servant, going to put out
The other eye of Gloucester.

ALBANY.
Gloucester’s eyes!

MESSENGER.
A servant that he bred, thrill’d with remorse,
Oppos’d against the act, bending his sword
To his great master; who, thereat enrag’d,
Flew on him, and amongst them fell’d him dead;
But not without that harmful stroke which since
Hath pluck’d him after.

ALBANY.
This shows you are above,
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
Lost he his other eye?

MESSENGER.
Both, both, my lord.
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
’Tis from your sister.

GONERIL.
[_Aside._] One way I like this well;
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way
The news is not so tart. I’ll read, and answer.

 [_Exit._]

ALBANY.
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?

MESSENGER.
Come with my lady hither.

ALBANY.
He is not here.

MESSENGER.
No, my good lord; I met him back again.

ALBANY.
Knows he the wickedness?

MESSENGER.
Ay, my good lord. ’Twas he inform’d against him;
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.

ALBANY.
Gloucester, I live
To thank thee for the love thou show’dst the King,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend,
Tell me what more thou know’st.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The French camp near Dover

 Enter Kent and a Gentleman.

KENT.
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back, know you no
reason?

GENTLEMAN.
Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his coming
forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so much fear
and danger that his personal return was most required and
necessary.

KENT.
Who hath he left behind him general?

GENTLEMAN.
The Mareschal of France, Monsieur La Far.

KENT.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief?

GENTLEMAN.
Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence;
And now and then an ample tear trill’d down
Her delicate cheek. It seem’d she was a queen
Over her passion; who, most rebel-like,
Sought to be king o’er her.

KENT.
O, then it mov’d her.

GENTLEMAN.
Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
Were like a better day. Those happy smilets
That play’d on her ripe lip seem’d not to know
What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence
As pearls from diamonds dropp’d. In brief,
Sorrow would be a rarity most belov’d,
If all could so become it.

KENT.
Made she no verbal question?

GENTLEMAN.
Faith, once or twice she heav’d the name of ‘father’
Pantingly forth, as if it press’d her heart;
Cried ‘Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!
Kent! father! sisters! What, i’ the storm? i’ the night?
Let pity not be believ’d!’ There she shook
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamour master’d her: then away she started
To deal with grief alone.

KENT.
It is the stars,
The stars above us govern our conditions;
Else one self mate and make could not beget
Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?

GENTLEMAN.
No.

KENT.
Was this before the King return’d?

GENTLEMAN.
No, since.

KENT.
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear’s i’ the town;
Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.

GENTLEMAN.
Why, good sir?

KENT.
A sovereign shame so elbows him. His own unkindness,
That stripp’d her from his benediction, turn’d her
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting
His mind so venomously that burning shame
Detains him from Cordelia.

GENTLEMAN.
Alack, poor gentleman!

KENT.
Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?

GENTLEMAN.
’Tis so; they are afoot.

KENT.
Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear
And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance.
I pray you, go along with me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The French camp. A Tent

 Enter with drum and colours, Cordelia, Physician
and Soldiers.

CORDELIA.
Alack, ’tis he: why, he was met even now
As mad as the vex’d sea; singing aloud;
Crown’d with rank fumiter and furrow weeds,
With harlocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;
Search every acre in the high-grown field,
And bring him to our eye.

 [_Exit an Officer._]

What can man’s wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved sense,
He that helps him take all my outward worth.

PHYSICIAN.
There is means, madam:
Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks; that to provoke in him
Are many simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of anguish.

CORDELIA.
All bless’d secrets,
All you unpublish’d virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears! Be aidant and remediate
In the good man’s distress! Seek, seek for him;
Lest his ungovern’d rage dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
News, madam;
The British powers are marching hitherward.

CORDELIA.
’Tis known before. Our preparation stands
In expectation of them. O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about;
Therefore great France
My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our ag’d father’s right:
Soon may I hear and see him!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle

 Enter Regan and Oswald.

REGAN.
But are my brother’s powers set forth?

OSWALD.
Ay, madam.

REGAN.
Himself in person there?

OSWALD.
Madam, with much ado.
Your sister is the better soldier.

REGAN.
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?

OSWALD.
No, madam.

REGAN.
What might import my sister’s letter to him?

OSWALD.
I know not, lady.

REGAN.
Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out,
To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life; moreover to descry
The strength o’ th’enemy.

OSWALD.
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.

REGAN.
Our troops set forth tomorrow; stay with us;
The ways are dangerous.

OSWALD.
I may not, madam:
My lady charg’d my duty in this business.

REGAN.
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Somethings, I know not what, I’ll love thee much.
Let me unseal the letter.

OSWALD.
Madam, I had rather—

REGAN.
I know your lady does not love her husband;
I am sure of that; and at her late being here
She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.

OSWALD.
I, madam?

REGAN.
I speak in understanding; y’are, I know’t:
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk’d,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Than for your lady’s. You may gather more.
If you do find him, pray you give him this;
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
So, fare you well.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

OSWALD.
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
What party I do follow.

REGAN.
Fare thee well.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The country near Dover

 Enter Gloucester, and Edgar  dressed like a peasant.

GLOUCESTER.
When shall I come to the top of that same hill?

EDGAR.
You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.

GLOUCESTER.
Methinks the ground is even.

EDGAR.
Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?

GLOUCESTER.
No, truly.

EDGAR.
Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes’ anguish.

GLOUCESTER.
So may it be indeed.
Methinks thy voice is alter’d; and thou speak’st
In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

EDGAR.
Y’are much deceiv’d: in nothing am I chang’d
But in my garments.

GLOUCESTER.
Methinks you’re better spoken.

EDGAR.
Come on, sir; here’s the place. Stand still. How fearful
And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Half way down
Hangs one that gathers samphire—dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
Diminish’d to her cock; her cock a buoy
Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge
That on th’unnumber’d idle pebble chafes
Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more;
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.

GLOUCESTER.
Set me where you stand.

EDGAR.
Give me your hand.
You are now within a foot of th’extreme verge.
For all beneath the moon would I not leap upright.

GLOUCESTER.
Let go my hand.
Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel
Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods
Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

EDGAR.
Now fare ye well, good sir.

 [_Seems to go._]

GLOUCESTER.
With all my heart.

EDGAR.
[_Aside._] Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Is done to cure it.

GLOUCESTER.
O you mighty gods!
This world I do renounce, and in your sights,
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
Now, fellow, fare thee well.

EDGAR.
Gone, sir, farewell.

 [_Gloucester leaps, and falls along_]

And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life when life itself
Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
By this had thought been past. Alive or dead?
Ho you, sir! friend! Hear you, sir? speak!
Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.
What are you, sir?

GLOUCESTER.
Away, and let me die.

EDGAR.
Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thou’dst shiver’d like an egg: but thou dost breathe;
Hast heavy substance; bleed’st not; speak’st; art sound.
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
Thy life is a miracle. Speak yet again.

GLOUCESTER.
But have I fall’n, or no?

EDGAR.
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
Look up a-height, the shrill-gorg’d lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, I have no eyes.
Is wretchedness depriv’d that benefit
To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort
When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage
And frustrate his proud will.

EDGAR.
Give me your arm.
Up, so. How is’t? Feel you your legs? You stand.

GLOUCESTER.
Too well, too well.

EDGAR.
This is above all strangeness.
Upon the crown o’ the cliff what thing was that
Which parted from you?

GLOUCESTER.
A poor unfortunate beggar.

EDGAR.
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
Horns whelk’d and waved like the enraged sea.
It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
Of men’s impossibilities, have preserv’d thee.

GLOUCESTER.
I do remember now: henceforth I’ll bear
Affliction till it do cry out itself
‘Enough, enough,’ and die. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man; often ’twould say,
‘The fiend, the fiend’; he led me to that place.

EDGAR.
Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes here?

 Enter Lear, fantastically
dressed up with flowers.

The safer sense will ne’er accommodate
His master thus.

LEAR.
No, they cannot touch me for coining. I am the King himself.

EDGAR.
O thou side-piercing sight!

LEAR.
Nature’s above art in that respect. There’s your press money.
That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper: draw me a clothier’s
yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this piece of toasted cheese
will do’t. There’s my gauntlet; I’ll prove it on a giant.
Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i’ the clout, i’
the clout. Hewgh! Give the word.

EDGAR.
Sweet marjoram.

LEAR.
Pass.

GLOUCESTER.
I know that voice.

LEAR.
Ha! Goneril with a white beard! They flattered me like a dog; and told
me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. To say
‘ay’ and ‘no’ to everything I said ‘ay’
and ‘no’ to was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet
me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder would not
peace at my bidding; there I found ’em, there I smelt ’em out.
Go to, they are not men o’ their words: they told me I was everything;
’tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.

GLOUCESTER.
The trick of that voice I do well remember:
Is’t not the King?

LEAR.
Ay, every inch a king.
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause?
Adultery? Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:
The wren goes to’t, and the small gilded fly
Does lecher in my sight. Let copulation thrive;
For Gloucester’s bastard son was kinder to his father
Than my daughters got ’tween the lawful sheets.
To’t, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
Behold yond simp’ring dame,
Whose face between her forks presages snow;
That minces virtue, and does shake the head
To hear of pleasure’s name.
The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to’t with a more riotous
appetite. Down from the waist they are centaurs, though women all
above. But to the girdle do the gods inherit, beneath is all the
fiend’s; there’s hell, there’s darkness, there is the sulphurous pit;
burning, scalding, stench,
consumption. Fie, fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet, good
apothecary, to sweeten my imagination. There’s money for thee.

GLOUCESTER.
O, let me kiss that hand!

LEAR.
Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.

GLOUCESTER.
O ruin’d piece of nature, this great world
Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?

LEAR.
I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me?
No, do thy worst, blind Cupid; I’ll not love.
Read thou this challenge; mark but the penning of it.

GLOUCESTER.
Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.

EDGAR.
I would not take this from report,
It is, and my heart breaks at it.

LEAR.
Read.

GLOUCESTER.
What, with the case of eyes?

LEAR.
O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money
in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a
light, yet you see how this world goes.

GLOUCESTER.
I see it feelingly.

LEAR.
What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes.
Look with thine ears. See how yon justice rails upon yon simple
thief. Hark, in thine ear: change places; and, handy-dandy, which
is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer’s
dog bark at a beggar?

GLOUCESTER.
Ay, sir.

LEAR.
And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold
the great image of authority: a dog’s obeyed in office.
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;
Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
For which thou whipp’st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
Through tatter’d clothes great vices do appear;
Robes and furr’d gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
Arm it in rags, a pygmy’s straw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, I say none; I’ll able ’em;
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
To seal the accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes,
And like a scurvy politician, seem
To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:
Pull off my boots: harder, harder, so.

EDGAR.
O, matter and impertinency mix’d!
Reason in madness!

LEAR.
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough, thy name is Gloucester.
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:
Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.

GLOUCESTER.
Alack, alack the day!

LEAR.
When we are born, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of fools. This a good block:
It were a delicate stratagem to shoe
A troop of horse with felt. I’ll put’t in proof
And when I have stol’n upon these son-in-laws,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

 Enter a Gentleman with
Attendants.

GENTLEMAN.
O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,
Your most dear daughter—

LEAR.
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
I am cut to the brains.

GENTLEMAN.
You shall have anything.

LEAR.
No seconds? All myself?
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
To use his eyes for garden water-pots,
Ay, and for laying autumn’s dust.

GENTLEMAN.
Good sir.

LEAR.
I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom.
What! I will be jovial. Come, come,
I am a king, my masters, know you that.

GENTLEMAN.
You are a royal one, and we obey you.

LEAR.
Then there’s life in’t. Come, and you get it,
You shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa!

 [_Exit running. Attendants follow._]

GENTLEMAN.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.

EDGAR.
Hail, gentle sir.

GENTLEMAN.
Sir, speed you. What’s your will?

EDGAR.
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?

GENTLEMAN.
Most sure and vulgar.
Everyone hears that, which can distinguish sound.

EDGAR.
But, by your favour,
How near’s the other army?

GENTLEMAN.
Near and on speedy foot; the main descry
Stands on the hourly thought.

EDGAR.
I thank you sir, that’s all.

GENTLEMAN.
Though that the queen on special cause is here,
Her army is mov’d on.

EDGAR.
I thank you, sir.

 [_Exit Gentleman._]

GLOUCESTER.
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
To die before you please.

EDGAR.
Well pray you, father.

GLOUCESTER.
Now, good sir, what are you?

EDGAR.
A most poor man, made tame to fortune’s blows;
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
I’ll lead you to some biding.

GLOUCESTER.
Hearty thanks:
The bounty and the benison of heaven
To boot, and boot.

 Enter Oswald.

OSWALD.
A proclaim’d prize! Most happy!
That eyeless head of thine was first fram’d flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out
That must destroy thee.

GLOUCESTER.
Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough to’t.

 [_Edgar interposes._]

OSWALD.
Wherefore, bold peasant,
Dar’st thou support a publish’d traitor? Hence;
Lest that th’infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.

EDGAR.
Chill not let go, zir, without vurther ’casion.

OSWALD.
Let go, slave, or thou diest!

EDGAR.
Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volke pass. An chud ha’
bin zwaggered out of my life, ’twould not ha’ bin zo long
as ’tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not near th’old man; keep
out, che vor ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the
harder: chill be plain with you.

OSWALD.
Out, dunghill!

EDGAR.
Chill pick your teeth, zir. Come! No matter vor your foins.

 [_They fight, and Edgar knocks him down._]

OSWALD.
Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
And give the letters which thou find’st about me
To Edmund, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
Upon the British party. O, untimely death!

 [_Dies._]

EDGAR.
I know thee well. A serviceable villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
As badness would desire.

GLOUCESTER.
What, is he dead?

EDGAR.
Sit you down, father; rest you.
Let’s see these pockets; the letters that he speaks of
May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorry
He had no other deathsman. Let us see:
Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not.
To know our enemies’ minds, we rip their hearts,
Their papers is more lawful.
[_Reads._] ‘Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have many
opportunities to cut him off: if your will want not, time and place
will be fruitfully offered. There is nothing done if he return the
conqueror: then am I the prisoner, and his bed my gaol; from the
loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your
labour. ‘Your (wife, so I would say) affectionate servant, ‘Goneril.’
O indistinguish’d space of woman’s will!
A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life,
And the exchange my brother! Here in the sands
Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murderous lechers: and in the mature time,
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practis’d Duke: for him ’tis well
That of thy death and business I can tell.

 [_Exit Edgar, dragging out the body._]

GLOUCESTER.
The King is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:
So should my thoughts be sever’d from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
The knowledge of themselves.

 [_A drum afar off._]

EDGAR.
Give me your hand.
Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. A Tent in the French Camp

Lear on a bed, asleep, soft
music playing; Physician, Gentleman and others
attending.

 Enter Cordelia and Kent.

CORDELIA.
O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.

KENT.
To be acknowledg’d, madam, is o’erpaid.
All my reports go with the modest truth;
Nor more, nor clipp’d, but so.

CORDELIA.
Be better suited,
These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
I prythee put them off.

KENT.
Pardon, dear madam;
Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
My boon I make it that you know me not
Till time and I think meet.

CORDELIA.
Then be’t so, my good lord. [_To the Physician._] How does the King?

PHYSICIAN.
Madam, sleeps still.

CORDELIA.
O you kind gods,
Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
The untun’d and jarring senses, O, wind up
Of this child-changed father.

PHYSICIAN.
So please your majesty
That we may wake the King: he hath slept long.

CORDELIA.
Be govern’d by your knowledge, and proceed
I’ the sway of your own will. Is he array’d?

PHYSICIAN.
Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep
We put fresh garments on him.
Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;
I doubt not of his temperance.

CORDELIA.
Very well.

PHYSICIAN.
Please you draw near. Louder the music there!

CORDELIA.
O my dear father! Restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made!

KENT.
Kind and dear princess!

CORDELIA.
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be oppos’d against the warring winds?
To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross lightning? to watch, poor perdu!
With this thin helm? Mine enemy’s dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.

PHYSICIAN.
Madam, do you; ’tis fittest.

CORDELIA.
How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?

LEAR.
You do me wrong to take me out o’ the grave.
Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.

CORDELIA.
Sir, do you know me?

LEAR.
You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?

CORDELIA.
Still, still, far wide!

PHYSICIAN.
He’s scarce awake: let him alone awhile.

LEAR.
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
I am mightily abus’d. I should e’en die with pity,
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
I will not swear these are my hands: let’s see;
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assur’d
Of my condition!

CORDELIA.
O, look upon me, sir,
And hold your hands in benediction o’er me.
No, sir, you must not kneel.

LEAR.
Pray, do not mock me:
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
And to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
Yet I am doubtful: for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is; and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To be my child Cordelia.

CORDELIA.
And so I am. I am.

LEAR.
Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray weep not:
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know you do not love me; for your sisters
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.
You have some cause, they have not.

CORDELIA.
No cause, no cause.

LEAR.
Am I in France?

KENT.
In your own kingdom, sir.

LEAR.
Do not abuse me.

PHYSICIAN.
Be comforted, good madam, the great rage,
You see, is kill’d in him: and yet it is danger
To make him even o’er the time he has lost.
Desire him to go in; trouble him no more
Till further settling.

CORDELIA.
Will’t please your highness walk?

LEAR.
You must bear with me:
Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.

 [_Exeunt Lear, Cordelia, Physician and Attendants._]

GENTLEMAN.
Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?

KENT.
Most certain, sir.

GENTLEMAN.
Who is conductor of his people?

KENT.
As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

GENTLEMAN.
They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl of Kent
in Germany.

KENT.
Report is changeable. ’Tis time to look about; the powers of
the kingdom approach apace.

GENTLEMAN.
The arbitrement is like to be bloody.
Fare you well, sir.

 [_Exit._]

KENT.
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
Or well or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought.

 [_Exit._]




ACT V

SCENE I. The Camp of the British Forces near Dover


 Enter, with drum and colours Edmund, Regan, Officers, Soldiers and
 others.

EDMUND.
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advis’d by aught
To change the course, he’s full of alteration
And self-reproving, bring his constant pleasure.

 [_To an Officer, who goes out._]

REGAN.
Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.

EDMUND.
’Tis to be doubted, madam.

REGAN.
Now, sweet lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?

EDMUND.
In honour’d love.

REGAN.
But have you never found my brother’s way
To the forfended place?

EDMUND.
That thought abuses you.

REGAN.
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
And bosom’d with her, as far as we call hers.

EDMUND.
No, by mine honour, madam.

REGAN.
I never shall endure her, dear my lord,
Be not familiar with her.

EDMUND.
Fear not,
She and the Duke her husband!

 Enter with drum and colours Albany, Goneril and Soldiers.

GONERIL.
[_Aside._] I had rather lose the battle than that sister
Should loosen him and me.

ALBANY.
Our very loving sister, well be-met.
Sir, this I heard: the King is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigour of our state
Forc’d to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
I never yet was valiant. For this business,
It toucheth us as France invades our land,
Not bolds the King, with others whom I fear
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.

EDMUND.
Sir, you speak nobly.

REGAN.
Why is this reason’d?

GONERIL.
Combine together ’gainst the enemy;
For these domestic and particular broils
Are not the question here.

ALBANY.
Let’s, then, determine with the ancient of war
On our proceeding.

EDMUND.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.

REGAN.
Sister, you’ll go with us?

GONERIL.
No.

REGAN.
’Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.

GONERIL.
[_Aside_.] O, ho, I know the riddle. I will go.

 [_Exeunt Edmund, Regan, Goneril, Officers, Soldiers and Attendants._]

 As they are going out, enter Edgar disguised.

EDGAR.
If e’er your grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.

ALBANY.
I’ll overtake you. Speak.

EDGAR.
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you!

ALBANY.
Stay till I have read the letter.

EDGAR.
I was forbid it.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
And I’ll appear again.

ALBANY.
Why, fare thee well. I will o’erlook thy paper.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

 Enter Edmund.

EDMUND.
The enemy’s in view; draw up your powers.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
By diligent discovery; but your haste
Is now urg’d on you.

ALBANY.
We will greet the time.

 [_Exit._]

EDMUND.
To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoy’d,
If both remain alive. To take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now, then, we’ll use
His countenance for the battle; which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon: for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. A field between the two Camps

 Alarum within. Enter with drum and colours, Lear, Cordelia and their
 Forces, and exeunt.

 Enter Edgar and Gloucester.

EDGAR.
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:
If ever I return to you again,
I’ll bring you comfort.

GLOUCESTER.
Grace go with you, sir!

 [_Exit Edgar._]

 Alarum and retreat within. Enter Edgar.

EDGAR.
Away, old man, give me thy hand, away!
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en:
Give me thy hand; come on!

GLOUCESTER.
No further, sir; a man may rot even here.

EDGAR.
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
Ripeness is all. Come on.

GLOUCESTER.
And that’s true too.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The British Camp near Dover

 Enter in conquest with drum and colours, Edmund, Lear and Cordelia
as prisoners; Officers, Soldiers, &c.

EDMUND.
Some officers take them away: good guard
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.

CORDELIA.
We are not the first
Who with best meaning have incurr’d the worst.
For thee, oppressed King, I am cast down;
Myself could else out-frown false fortune’s frown.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?

LEAR.
No, no, no, no. Come, let’s away to prison:
We two alone will sing like birds i’ the cage:
When thou dost ask me blessing I’ll kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness. So we’ll live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news; and we’ll talk with them too,
Who loses and who wins; who’s in, who’s out;
And take upon’s the mystery of things,
As if we were God’s spies. And we’ll wear out,
In a wall’d prison, packs and sects of great ones
That ebb and flow by the moon.

EDMUND.
Take them away.

LEAR.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;
The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make us weep!
We’ll see ’em starve first: come.

 [_Exeunt Lear and Cordelia, guarded._]

EDMUND.
Come hither, captain, hark.
Take thou this note [_giving a paper_]; go follow them to prison.
One step I have advanc’d thee; if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is; to be tender-minded
Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
Will not bear question; either say thou’lt do’t,
Or thrive by other means.

CAPTAIN.
I’ll do’t, my lord.

EDMUND.
About it; and write happy when thou hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so
As I have set it down.

CAPTAIN.
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
If it be man’s work, I’ll do’t.

 [_Exit._]

 Flourish. Enter Albany, Goneril,
Regan, Officers and Attendants.

ALBANY.
Sir, you have show’d today your valiant strain,
And fortune led you well: you have the captives
Who were the opposites of this day’s strife:
I do require them of you, so to use them
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.

EDMUND.
Sir, I thought it fit
To send the old and miserable King
To some retention and appointed guard;
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
And turn our impress’d lances in our eyes
Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;
My reason all the same; and they are ready
Tomorrow, or at further space, to appear
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
And the best quarrels in the heat are curs’d
By those that feel their sharpness.
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.

ALBANY.
Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
Not as a brother.

REGAN.
That’s as we list to grace him.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers;
Bore the commission of my place and person;
The which immediacy may well stand up
And call itself your brother.

GONERIL.
Not so hot:
In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
More than in your addition.

REGAN.
In my rights,
By me invested, he compeers the best.

ALBANY.
That were the most, if he should husband you.

REGAN.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.

GONERIL.
Holla, holla!
That eye that told you so look’d but asquint.

REGAN.
Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
From a full-flowing stomach. General,
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:
Witness the world that I create thee here
My lord and master.

GONERIL.
Mean you to enjoy him?

ALBANY.
The let-alone lies not in your good will.

EDMUND.
Nor in thine, lord.

ALBANY.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.

REGAN.
[_To Edmund._] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.

ALBANY.
Stay yet; hear reason: Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital treason; and, in thine arrest,
This gilded serpent. [_pointing to Goneril._]
For your claim, fair sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife;
’Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
And I her husband contradict your bans.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My lady is bespoke.

GONERIL.
An interlude!

ALBANY.
Thou art arm’d, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound:
If none appear to prove upon thy person
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge. [_Throwing down a glove._]
I’ll make it on thy heart,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaim’d thee.

REGAN.
Sick, O, sick!

GONERIL.
[_Aside._] If not, I’ll ne’er trust medicine.

EDMUND.
There’s my exchange. [_Throwing down a glove._]
What in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
My truth and honour firmly.

ALBANY.
A herald, ho!

 Enter a Herald.

Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.

REGAN.
My sickness grows upon me.

ALBANY.
She is not well. Convey her to my tent.

 [_Exit Regan, led._]

Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound
And read out this.

OFFICER.
Sound, trumpet!

 [_A trumpet sounds._]

HERALD.
[_Reads._] ‘If any man of quality or degree within the lists of
the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound
of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.’

EDMUND.
Sound!

 [_First trumpet._]

HERALD.
Again!

 [_Second trumpet._]

HERALD.
Again!

 Third trumpet. Trumpet answers within. Enter Edgar, armed, preceded by
 a trumpet.

ALBANY.
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o’ the trumpet.

HERALD.
What are you?
Your name, your quality? and why you answer
This present summons?

EDGAR.
Know my name is lost;
By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
Yet am I noble as the adversary
I come to cope.

ALBANY.
Which is that adversary?

EDGAR.
What’s he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of Gloucester?

EDMUND.
Himself, what say’st thou to him?

EDGAR.
Draw thy sword,
That if my speech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.
Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
My oath, and my profession: I protest,
Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor;
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
Conspirant ’gainst this high illustrious prince;
And, from the extremest upward of thy head
To the descent and dust beneath thy foot,
A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou ‘No,’
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou liest.

EDMUND.
In wisdom I should ask thy name;
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
Back do I toss those treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart;
Which for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!

 [_Alarums. They fight. Edmund falls._]

ALBANY.
Save him, save him!

GONERIL.
This is mere practice, Gloucester:
By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquish’d,
But cozen’d and beguil’d.

ALBANY.
Shut your mouth, dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it. Hold, sir;
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady; I perceive you know it.

 [_Gives the letter to Edmund._]

GONERIL.
Say if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:
Who can arraign me for’t?

 [_Exit._]

ALBANY.
Most monstrous! O!
Know’st thou this paper?

EDMUND.
Ask me not what I know.

ALBANY.
[_To an Officer, who goes out._] Go after her; she’s desperate;
govern her.

EDMUND.
What you have charg’d me with, that have I done;
And more, much more; the time will bring it out.
’Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
That hast this fortune on me? If thou’rt noble,
I do forgive thee.

EDGAR.
Let’s exchange charity.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
If more, the more thou hast wrong’d me.
My name is Edgar and thy father’s son.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us:
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Cost him his eyes.

EDMUND.
Thou hast spoken right, ’tis true;
The wheel is come full circle; I am here.

ALBANY.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father.

EDGAR.
Worthy prince, I know’t.

ALBANY.
Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?

EDGAR.
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
And when ’tis told, O that my heart would burst!
The bloody proclamation to escape
That follow’d me so near,—O, our lives’ sweetness!
That with the pain of death we’d hourly die
Rather than die at once!—taught me to shift
Into a madman’s rags; t’assume a semblance
That very dogs disdain’d; and in this habit
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,
Led him, begg’d for him, sav’d him from despair;
Never,—O fault!—reveal’d myself unto him
Until some half hour past, when I was arm’d;
Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
I ask’d his blessing, and from first to last
Told him my pilgrimage. But his flaw’d heart,
Alack, too weak the conflict to support!
’Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.

EDMUND.
This speech of yours hath mov’d me,
And shall perchance do good, but speak you on;
You look as you had something more to say.

ALBANY.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.

EDGAR.
This would have seem’d a period
To such as love not sorrow; but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more,
And top extremity.
Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man
Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
Shunn’d my abhorr’d society; but then finding
Who ’twas that so endur’d, with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck, and bellow’d out
As he’d burst heaven; threw him on my father;
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
That ever ear receiv’d, which in recounting
His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
And there I left him tranc’d.

ALBANY.
But who was this?

EDGAR.
Kent, sir, the banish’d Kent; who in disguise
Follow’d his enemy king and did him service
Improper for a slave.

 Enter a Gentleman hastily,
with a bloody knife.

GENTLEMAN.
Help, help! O, help!

EDGAR.
What kind of help?

ALBANY.
Speak, man.

EDGAR.
What means this bloody knife?

GENTLEMAN.
’Tis hot, it smokes;
It came even from the heart of—O! she’s dead!

ALBANY.
Who dead? Speak, man.

GENTLEMAN.
Your lady, sir, your lady; and her sister
By her is poisoned; she hath confesses it.

EDMUND.
I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marry in an instant.

EDGAR.
Here comes Kent.

 Enter Kent.

ALBANY.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
This judgement of the heavens that makes us tremble
Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
The time will not allow the compliment
Which very manners urges.

KENT.
I am come
To bid my King and master aye good night:
Is he not here?

ALBANY.
Great thing of us forgot!
Speak, Edmund, where’s the King? and where’s Cordelia?

 The bodies of Goneril and
Regan are brought in.

Seest thou this object, Kent?

KENT.
Alack, why thus?

EDMUND.
Yet Edmund was belov’d.
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.

ALBANY.
Even so. Cover their faces.

EDMUND.
I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,
Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia;
Nay, send in time.

ALBANY.
Run, run, O, run!

EDGAR.
To who, my lord? Who has the office? Send
Thy token of reprieve.

EDMUND.
Well thought on: take my sword,
Give it the captain.

EDGAR.
Haste thee for thy life.

 [_Exit Edgar._]

EDMUND.
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid herself.

ALBANY.
The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.

 [_Edmund is borne off._]

 Enter Lear with Cordelia dead in his arms; Edgar,
Officer and others following.

LEAR.
Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stone.
Had I your tongues and eyes, I’ld use them so
That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone for ever!
I know when one is dead, and when one lives;
She’s dead as earth. Lend me a looking glass;
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why, then she lives.

KENT.
Is this the promis’d end?

EDGAR.
Or image of that horror?

ALBANY.
Fall, and cease!

LEAR.
This feather stirs; she lives! If it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.

KENT.
O, my good master! [_Kneeling._]

LEAR.
Prythee, away!

EDGAR.
’Tis noble Kent, your friend.

LEAR.
A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
I might have sav’d her; now she’s gone for ever!
Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
What is’t thou say’st? Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I kill’d the slave that was a-hanging thee.

OFFICER.
’Tis true, my lords, he did.

LEAR.
Did I not, fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
I would have made them skip. I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o’ the best, I’ll tell you straight.

KENT.
If Fortune brag of two she lov’d and hated,
One of them we behold.

LEAR.
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?

KENT.
The same,
Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?

LEAR.
He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that;
He’ll strike, and quickly too:. He’s dead and rotten.

KENT.
No, my good lord; I am the very man.

LEAR.
I’ll see that straight.

KENT.
That from your first of difference and decay
Have follow’d your sad steps.

LEAR.
You are welcome hither.

KENT.
Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
And desperately are dead.

LEAR.
Ay, so I think.

ALBANY.
He knows not what he says; and vain is it
That we present us to him.

EDGAR.
Very bootless.

 Enter an Officer.

OFFICER.
Edmund is dead, my lord.

ALBANY.
That’s but a trifle here.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
During the life of this old majesty,
To him our absolute power;
[_to Edgar and Kent_] you to your rights;
With boot and such addition as your honours
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!

LEAR.
And my poor fool is hang’d! No, no, no life!
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou’lt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never!
Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
Do you see this? Look on her: look, her lips,
Look there, look there!

 [_He dies._]

EDGAR.
He faints! My lord, my lord!

KENT.
Break, heart; I prythee break!

EDGAR.
Look up, my lord.

KENT.
Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! He hates him
That would upon the rack of this rough world
Stretch him out longer.

EDGAR.
He is gone indeed.

KENT.
The wonder is, he hath endur’d so long:
He but usurp’d his life.

ALBANY.
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Is general woe. [_To Edgar and Kent._] Friends of my soul, you twain,
Rule in this realm and the gor’d state sustain.

KENT.
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
My master calls me, I must not say no.

EDGAR.
The weight of this sad time we must obey;
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most; we that are young
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

 [_Exeunt with a dead march._]






 THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MACBETH ***
cover 




MACBETH

by William Shakespeare




Contents

ACT I
Scene I. An open Place.
Scene II. A Camp near Forres.
Scene III. A heath.
Scene IV. Forres. A Room in the Palace.
Scene V. Inverness. A Room in Macbeth’s Castle.
Scene VI. The same. Before the Castle.
Scene VII. The same. A Lobby in the Castle.


ACT II
Scene I. Inverness. Court within the Castle.
Scene II. The same.
Scene III. The same.
Scene IV. The same. Without the Castle.


ACT III
Scene I. Forres. A Room in the Palace.
Scene II. The same. Another Room in the Palace.
Scene III. The same. A Park or Lawn, with a gate leading to the Palace.
Scene IV. The same. A Room of state in the Palace.
Scene V. The heath.
Scene VI. Forres. A Room in the Palace.


ACT IV
Scene I. A dark Cave. In the middle, a Cauldron Boiling.
Scene II. Fife. A Room in Macduff’s Castle.
Scene III. England. Before the King’s Palace.


ACT V
Scene I. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.
Scene II. The Country near Dunsinane.
Scene III. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.
Scene IV. Country near Dunsinane: a Wood in view.
Scene V. Dunsinane. Within the castle.
Scene VI. The same. A Plain before the Castle.
Scene VII. The same. Another part of the Plain.
Scene VIII. The same. Another part of the field.




Dramatis Personæ

DUNCAN, King of Scotland.
MALCOLM, his Son.
DONALBAIN, his Son.
MACBETH, General in the King’s Army.
BANQUO, General in the King’s Army.
MACDUFF, Nobleman of Scotland.
LENNOX, Nobleman of Scotland.
ROSS, Nobleman of Scotland.
MENTEITH, Nobleman of Scotland.
ANGUS, Nobleman of Scotland.
CAITHNESS, Nobleman of Scotland.
FLEANCE, Son to Banquo.
SIWARD, Earl of Northumberland, General of the English Forces.
YOUNG SIWARD, his Son.
SEYTON, an Officer attending on Macbeth.
BOY, Son to Macduff.
An English Doctor.
A Scottish Doctor.
A Soldier.
A Porter.
An Old Man.

LADY MACBETH.
LADY MACDUFF.
Gentlewoman attending on Lady Macbeth.
HECATE, and three Witches.

Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murderers, Attendants and
Messengers.

The Ghost of Banquo and several other Apparitions.

SCENE: In the end of the Fourth Act, in England; through the rest of
the Play, in Scotland; and chiefly at Macbeth’s Castle.




ACT I

SCENE I. An open Place.


 Thunder and Lightning. Enter three Witches.

FIRST WITCH.
When shall we three meet again?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?

SECOND WITCH.
When the hurlyburly’s done,
When the battle’s lost and won.

THIRD WITCH.
That will be ere the set of sun.

FIRST WITCH.
Where the place?

SECOND WITCH.
Upon the heath.

THIRD WITCH.
There to meet with Macbeth.

FIRST WITCH.
I come, Graymalkin!

SECOND WITCH.
Paddock calls.

THIRD WITCH.
Anon.

ALL.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
Hover through the fog and filthy air.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Camp near Forres.

 Alarum within. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox, with
 Attendants, meeting a bleeding Captain.

DUNCAN.
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.

MALCOLM.
This is the sergeant
Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
’Gainst my captivity.—Hail, brave friend!
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.

SOLDIER.
Doubtful it stood;
As two spent swimmers that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald
(Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
The multiplying villainies of nature
Do swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Show’d like a rebel’s whore. But all’s too weak;
For brave Macbeth (well he deserves that name),
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandish’d steel,
Which smok’d with bloody execution,
Like Valour’s minion, carv’d out his passage,
Till he fac’d the slave;
Which ne’er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseam’d him from the nave to the chops,
And fix’d his head upon our battlements.

DUNCAN.
O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!

SOLDIER.
As whence the sun ’gins his reflection
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring, whence comfort seem’d to come
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had, with valour arm’d,
Compell’d these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbish’d arms and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.

DUNCAN.
Dismay’d not this
Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?

SOLDIER.
Yes;
As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharg’d with double cracks;
So they
Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
Or memorize another Golgotha,
I cannot tell—
But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.

DUNCAN.
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds:
They smack of honour both.—Go, get him surgeons.

 [_Exit Captain, attended._]

 Enter Ross and Angus.

Who comes here?

MALCOLM.
The worthy Thane of Ross.

LENNOX.
What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look
That seems to speak things strange.

ROSS.
God save the King!

DUNCAN.
Whence cam’st thou, worthy thane?

ROSS.
From Fife, great King,
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;
Till that Bellona’s bridegroom, lapp’d in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point, rebellious arm ’gainst arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,
The victory fell on us.

DUNCAN.
Great happiness!

ROSS.
That now
Sweno, the Norways’ king, craves composition;
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursed at Saint Colme’s Inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

DUNCAN.
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest. Go pronounce his present death,
And with his former title greet Macbeth.

ROSS.
I’ll see it done.

DUNCAN.
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. A heath.

 Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

FIRST WITCH.
Where hast thou been, sister?

SECOND WITCH.
Killing swine.

THIRD WITCH.
Sister, where thou?

FIRST WITCH.
A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap,
And mounch’d, and mounch’d, and mounch’d. “Give me,” quoth I.
“Aroint thee, witch!” the rump-fed ronyon cries.
Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o’ th’ _Tiger:_
But in a sieve I’ll thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
I’ll do, I’ll do, and I’ll do.

SECOND WITCH.
I’ll give thee a wind.

FIRST WITCH.
Th’art kind.

THIRD WITCH.
And I another.

FIRST WITCH.
I myself have all the other,
And the very ports they blow,
All the quarters that they know
I’ the shipman’s card.
I will drain him dry as hay:
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his pent-house lid;
He shall live a man forbid.
Weary sev’n-nights nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine:
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tost.
Look what I have.

SECOND WITCH.
Show me, show me.

FIRST WITCH.
Here I have a pilot’s thumb,
Wrack’d as homeward he did come.

 [_Drum within._]

THIRD WITCH.
A drum, a drum!
Macbeth doth come.

ALL.
The Weird Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about:
Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace!—the charm’s wound up.

 Enter Macbeth and Banquo.

MACBETH.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.

BANQUO.
How far is’t call’d to Forres?—What are these,
So wither’d, and so wild in their attire,
That look not like the inhabitants o’ th’ earth,
And yet are on’t?—Live you? or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand me,
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.

MACBETH.
Speak, if you can;—what are you?

FIRST WITCH.
All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!

SECOND WITCH.
All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!

THIRD WITCH.
All hail, Macbeth! that shalt be king hereafter!

BANQUO.
Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair?—I’ th’ name of truth,
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time,
And say which grain will grow, and which will not,
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favours nor your hate.

FIRST WITCH.
Hail!

SECOND WITCH.
Hail!

THIRD WITCH.
Hail!

FIRST WITCH.
Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.

SECOND WITCH.
Not so happy, yet much happier.

THIRD WITCH.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!

FIRST WITCH.
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!

MACBETH.
Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more.
By Sinel’s death I know I am Thane of Glamis;
But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives,
A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence? or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting?—Speak, I charge you.

 [_Witches vanish._]

BANQUO.
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanish’d?

MACBETH.
Into the air; and what seem’d corporal,
Melted as breath into the wind.
Would they had stay’d!

BANQUO.
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?

MACBETH.
Your children shall be kings.

BANQUO.
You shall be king.

MACBETH.
And Thane of Cawdor too; went it not so?

BANQUO.
To the selfsame tune and words. Who’s here?

 Enter Ross and Angus.

ROSS.
The King hath happily receiv’d, Macbeth,
The news of thy success, and when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels’ fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his: silenc’d with that,
In viewing o’er the rest o’ th’ selfsame day,
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale
Came post with post; and everyone did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom’s great defence,
And pour’d them down before him.

ANGUS.
We are sent
To give thee from our royal master thanks;
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.

ROSS.
And, for an earnest of a greater honour,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor:
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane,
For it is thine.

BANQUO.
What, can the devil speak true?

MACBETH.
The Thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
In borrow’d robes?

ANGUS.
Who was the Thane lives yet,
But under heavy judgement bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combin’d
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
He labour’d in his country’s wrack, I know not;
But treasons capital, confess’d and prov’d,
Have overthrown him.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor:
The greatest is behind. [_To Ross and Angus._] Thanks for your pains.
[_To Banquo._] Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
Promis’d no less to them?

BANQUO.
That, trusted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But ’tis strange:
And oftentimes to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
Win us with honest trifles, to betray’s
In deepest consequence.—
Cousins, a word, I pray you.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] Two truths are told,
As happy prologues to the swelling act
Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.—
[_Aside._] This supernatural soliciting
Cannot be ill; cannot be good. If ill,
Why hath it given me earnest of success,
Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor:
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair,
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
Against the use of nature? Present fears
Are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of man
That function is smother’d in surmise,
And nothing is but what is not.

BANQUO.
Look, how our partner’s rapt.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me
Without my stir.

BANQUO.
New honours come upon him,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
But with the aid of use.

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] Come what come may,
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

BANQUO.
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.

MACBETH.
Give me your favour. My dull brain was wrought
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
Are register’d where every day I turn
The leaf to read them.—Let us toward the King.—
Think upon what hath chanc’d; and at more time,
The interim having weigh’d it, let us speak
Our free hearts each to other.

BANQUO.
Very gladly.

MACBETH.
Till then, enough.—Come, friends.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Forres. A Room in the Palace.

 Flourish. Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox and Attendants.

DUNCAN.
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet return’d?

MALCOLM.
My liege,
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
With one that saw him die, who did report,
That very frankly he confess’d his treasons,
Implor’d your Highness’ pardon, and set forth
A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
Became him like the leaving it; he died
As one that had been studied in his death,
To throw away the dearest thing he ow’d
As ’twere a careless trifle.

DUNCAN.
There’s no art
To find the mind’s construction in the face:
He was a gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.

 Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross and Angus.

O worthiest cousin!
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before,
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserv’d;
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine! only I have left to say,
More is thy due than more than all can pay.

MACBETH.
The service and the loyalty I owe,
In doing it, pays itself. Your Highness’ part
Is to receive our duties: and our duties
Are to your throne and state, children and servants;
Which do but what they should, by doing everything
Safe toward your love and honour.

DUNCAN.
Welcome hither:
I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
To make thee full of growing.—Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserv’d, nor must be known
No less to have done so, let me infold thee
And hold thee to my heart.

BANQUO.
There if I grow,
The harvest is your own.

DUNCAN.
My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow.—Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know,
We will establish our estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm; whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland: which honour must
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
On all deservers.—From hence to Inverness,
And bind us further to you.

MACBETH.
The rest is labour, which is not us’d for you:
I’ll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
The hearing of my wife with your approach;
So, humbly take my leave.

DUNCAN.
My worthy Cawdor!

MACBETH.
[_Aside._] The Prince of Cumberland!—That is a step
On which I must fall down, or else o’erleap,
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires!
Let not light see my black and deep desires.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be,
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

 [_Exit._]

DUNCAN.
True, worthy Banquo! He is full so valiant;
And in his commendations I am fed.
It is a banquet to me. Let’s after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
It is a peerless kinsman.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Inverness. A Room in Macbeth’s Castle.

 Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter.

LADY MACBETH.
“They met me in the day of success; and I have learned by the
perfect’st report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I
burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air,
into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came
missives from the King, who all-hailed me, ‘Thane of Cawdor’; by which
title, before, these Weird Sisters saluted me, and referred me to the
coming on of time, with ‘Hail, king that shalt be!’ This have I thought
good to deliver thee (my dearest partner of greatness) that thou
might’st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what
greatness is promis’d thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.”

Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be
What thou art promis’d. Yet do I fear thy nature;
It is too full o’ th’ milk of human kindness
To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great;
Art not without ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly,
That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou’dst have, great Glamis,
That which cries, “Thus thou must do,” if thou have it;
And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
And chastise with the valour of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crown’d withal.

 Enter a Messenger.

What is your tidings?

MESSENGER.
The King comes here tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
Thou’rt mad to say it.
Is not thy master with him? who, were’t so,
Would have inform’d for preparation.

MESSENGER.
So please you, it is true. Our thane is coming.
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his message.

LADY MACBETH.
Give him tending.
He brings great news.

 [_Exit Messenger._]

The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full
Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood,
Stop up th’ access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
Th’ effect and it! Come to my woman’s breasts,
And take my milk for gall, your murd’ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature’s mischief! Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
To cry, “Hold, hold!”

 Enter Macbeth.

Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor!
Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.

MACBETH.
My dearest love,
Duncan comes here tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
And when goes hence?

MACBETH.
Tomorrow, as he purposes.

LADY MACBETH.
O, never
Shall sun that morrow see!
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,
But be the serpent under’t. He that’s coming
Must be provided for; and you shall put
This night’s great business into my dispatch;
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

MACBETH.
We will speak further.

LADY MACBETH.
Only look up clear;
To alter favour ever is to fear.
Leave all the rest to me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The same. Before the Castle.

 Hautboys. Servants of Macbeth attending.

 Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus
 and Attendants.

DUNCAN.
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.

BANQUO.
This guest of summer,
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven’s breath
Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle.
Where they most breed and haunt, I have observ’d
The air is delicate.

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

DUNCAN.
See, see, our honour’d hostess!—
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
How you shall bid God ’ild us for your pains,
And thank us for your trouble.

LADY MACBETH.
All our service,
In every point twice done, and then done double,
Were poor and single business to contend
Against those honours deep and broad wherewith
Your Majesty loads our house: for those of old,
And the late dignities heap’d up to them,
We rest your hermits.

DUNCAN.
Where’s the Thane of Cawdor?
We cours’d him at the heels, and had a purpose
To be his purveyor: but he rides well;
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guest tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
Your servants ever
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
To make their audit at your Highness’ pleasure,
Still to return your own.

DUNCAN.
Give me your hand;
Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,
And shall continue our graces towards him.
By your leave, hostess.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The same. A Lobby in the Castle.

 Hautboys and torches. Enter, and pass over, a Sewer and divers
 Servants with dishes and service. Then enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well
It were done quickly. If th’ assassination
Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
With his surcease success; that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all—here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases
We still have judgement here; that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which being taught, return
To plague th’ inventor. This even-handed justice
Commends th’ ingredience of our poison’d chalice
To our own lips. He’s here in double trust:
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of his taking-off;
And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubin, hors’d
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind.—I have no spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself
And falls on th’ other—

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

How now! what news?

LADY MACBETH.
He has almost supp’d. Why have you left the chamber?

MACBETH.
Hath he ask’d for me?

LADY MACBETH.
Know you not he has?

MACBETH.
We will proceed no further in this business:
He hath honour’d me of late; and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.

LADY MACBETH.
Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dress’d yourself? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely? From this time
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
To be the same in thine own act and valour
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Which thou esteem’st the ornament of life,
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
Letting “I dare not” wait upon “I would,”
Like the poor cat i’ th’ adage?

MACBETH.
Pr’ythee, peace!
I dare do all that may become a man;
Who dares do more is none.

LADY MACBETH.
What beast was’t, then,
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man;
And, to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:
They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me:
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Have pluck’d my nipple from his boneless gums
And dash’d the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.

MACBETH.
If we should fail?

LADY MACBETH.
We fail?
But screw your courage to the sticking-place,
And we’ll not fail. When Duncan is asleep
(Whereto the rather shall his day’s hard journey
Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep
Their drenched natures lie as in a death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th’ unguarded Duncan? what not put upon
His spongy officers; who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell?

MACBETH.
Bring forth men-children only;
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Nothing but males. Will it not be receiv’d,
When we have mark’d with blood those sleepy two
Of his own chamber, and us’d their very daggers,
That they have done’t?

LADY MACBETH.
Who dares receive it other,
As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar
Upon his death?

MACBETH.
I am settled, and bend up
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II

SCENE I. Inverness. Court within the Castle.


 Enter Banquo and Fleance with a torch before him.

BANQUO.
How goes the night, boy?

FLEANCE.
The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.

BANQUO.
And she goes down at twelve.

FLEANCE.
I take’t, ’tis later, sir.

BANQUO.
Hold, take my sword.—There’s husbandry in heaven;
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repose!

 Enter Macbeth and a Servant with a torch.

Give me my sword.—Who’s there?

MACBETH.
A friend.

BANQUO.
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King’s abed:
He hath been in unusual pleasure and
Sent forth great largess to your offices.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
In measureless content.

MACBETH.
Being unprepar’d,
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.

BANQUO.
All’s well.
I dreamt last night of the three Weird Sisters:
To you they have show’d some truth.

MACBETH.
I think not of them:
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that business,
If you would grant the time.

BANQUO.
At your kind’st leisure.

MACBETH.
If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis,
It shall make honour for you.

BANQUO.
So I lose none
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My bosom franchis’d, and allegiance clear,
I shall be counsell’d.

MACBETH.
Good repose the while!

BANQUO.
Thanks, sir: the like to you.

 [_Exeunt Banquo and Fleance._]

MACBETH.
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee:—
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable
As this which now I draw.
Thou marshall’st me the way that I was going;
And such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools o’ the other senses,
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;
And on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,
Which was not so before.—There’s no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs
Thus to mine eyes.—Now o’er the one half-world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtain’d sleep. Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate’s off’rings; and wither’d murder,
Alarum’d by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his design
Moves like a ghost.—Thou sure and firm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it.—Whiles I threat, he lives.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

 [_A bell rings._]

I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
That summons thee to heaven or to hell.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH.
That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold:
What hath quench’d them hath given me fire.—Hark!—Peace!
It was the owl that shriek’d, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the stern’st good night. He is about it.
The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg’d their possets,
That death and nature do contend about them,
Whether they live or die.

MACBETH.
[_Within._] Who’s there?—what, ho!

LADY MACBETH.
Alack! I am afraid they have awak’d,
And ’tis not done. Th’ attempt and not the deed
Confounds us.—Hark!—I laid their daggers ready;
He could not miss ’em.—Had he not resembled
My father as he slept, I had done’t.—My husband!

 Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
I have done the deed.—Didst thou not hear a noise?

LADY MACBETH.
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
Did not you speak?

MACBETH.
When?

LADY MACBETH.
Now.

MACBETH.
As I descended?

LADY MACBETH.
Ay.

MACBETH.
Hark!—Who lies i’ th’ second chamber?

LADY MACBETH.
Donalbain.

MACBETH.
This is a sorry sight.

 [_Looking on his hands._]

LADY MACBETH.
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

MACBETH.
There’s one did laugh in’s sleep, and one cried, “Murder!”
That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them.
But they did say their prayers, and address’d them
Again to sleep.

LADY MACBETH.
There are two lodg’d together.

MACBETH.
One cried, “God bless us!” and, “Amen,” the other,
As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands.
List’ning their fear, I could not say “Amen,”
When they did say, “God bless us.”

LADY MACBETH.
Consider it not so deeply.

MACBETH.
But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen”?
I had most need of blessing, and “Amen”
Stuck in my throat.

LADY MACBETH.
These deeds must not be thought
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.

MACBETH.
Methought I heard a voice cry, “Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep,”—the innocent sleep;
Sleep that knits up the ravell’d sleave of care,
The death of each day’s life, sore labour’s bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.

LADY MACBETH.
What do you mean?

MACBETH.
Still it cried, “Sleep no more!” to all the house:
“Glamis hath murder’d sleep, and therefore Cawdor
Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more!”

LADY MACBETH.
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble strength to think
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water,
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.—
Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
They must lie there: go carry them, and smear
The sleepy grooms with blood.

MACBETH.
I’ll go no more:
I am afraid to think what I have done;
Look on’t again I dare not.

LADY MACBETH.
Infirm of purpose!
Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
Are but as pictures. ’Tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
I’ll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
For it must seem their guilt.

 [_Exit. Knocking within._]

MACBETH.
Whence is that knocking?
How is’t with me, when every noise appals me?
What hands are here? Ha, they pluck out mine eyes!
Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH.
My hands are of your color, but I shame
To wear a heart so white. [_Knocking within._] I hear knocking
At the south entry:—retire we to our chamber.
A little water clears us of this deed:
How easy is it then! Your constancy
Hath left you unattended.—[_Knocking within._] Hark, more knocking.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.

MACBETH.
To know my deed, ’twere best not know myself. [_Knocking within._]
Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same.

 Enter a Porter. Knocking within.

PORTER.
Here’s a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell gate, he should
have old turning the key. [_Knocking._] Knock, knock, knock. Who’s
there, i’ th’ name of Belzebub? Here’s a farmer that hanged himself on
the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you;
here you’ll sweat for’t. [_Knocking._] Knock, knock! Who’s there, i’
th’ other devil’s name? Faith, here’s an equivocator, that could swear
in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough
for God’s sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in,
equivocator. [_Knocking._] Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there? Faith,
here’s an English tailor come hither, for stealing out of a French
hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose. [_Knocking._]
Knock, knock. Never at quiet! What are you?—But this place is too cold
for hell. I’ll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in
some of all professions, that go the primrose way to th’ everlasting
bonfire. [_Knocking._] Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.

 [_Opens the gate._]

 Enter Macduff and Lennox.

MACDUFF.
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
That you do lie so late?

PORTER.
Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and drink, sir, is
a great provoker of three things.

MACDUFF.
What three things does drink especially provoke?

PORTER.
Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes
and unprovokes; it provokes the desire, but it takes away the
performance. Therefore much drink may be said to be an equivocator with
lechery: it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes
him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to, and
not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and giving him
the lie, leaves him.

MACDUFF.
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.

PORTER.
That it did, sir, i’ the very throat on me; but I requited him for his
lie; and (I think) being too strong for him, though he took up my legs
sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.

MACDUFF.
Is thy master stirring?

 Enter Macbeth.

Our knocking has awak’d him; here he comes.

LENNOX.
Good morrow, noble sir!

MACBETH.
Good morrow, both!

MACDUFF.
Is the King stirring, worthy thane?

MACBETH.
Not yet.

MACDUFF.
He did command me to call timely on him.
I have almost slipp’d the hour.

MACBETH.
I’ll bring you to him.

MACDUFF.
I know this is a joyful trouble to you;
But yet ’tis one.

MACBETH.
The labour we delight in physics pain.
This is the door.

MACDUFF.
I’ll make so bold to call.
For ’tis my limited service.

 [_Exit Macduff._]

LENNOX.
Goes the King hence today?

MACBETH.
He does. He did appoint so.

LENNOX.
The night has been unruly: where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i’ th’ air, strange screams of death,
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion and confus’d events,
New hatch’d to the woeful time. The obscure bird
Clamour’d the live-long night. Some say the earth
Was feverous, and did shake.

MACBETH.
’Twas a rough night.

LENNOX.
My young remembrance cannot parallel
A fellow to it.

 Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF.
O horror, horror, horror!
Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!

MACBETH, LENNOX.
What’s the matter?

MACDUFF.
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
The Lord’s anointed temple, and stole thence
The life o’ th’ building.

MACBETH.
What is’t you say? the life?

LENNOX.
Mean you his majesty?

MACDUFF.
Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.
See, and then speak yourselves.

 [_Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox._]

Awake, awake!—
Ring the alarum bell.—Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!
Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit,
And look on death itself! Up, up, and see
The great doom’s image. Malcolm! Banquo!
As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
To countenance this horror!

 [_Alarum-bell rings._]

 Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH.
What’s the business,
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!

MACDUFF.
O gentle lady,
’Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
The repetition, in a woman’s ear,
Would murder as it fell.

 Enter Banquo.

O Banquo, Banquo!
Our royal master’s murder’d!

LADY MACBETH.
Woe, alas!
What, in our house?

BANQUO.
Too cruel anywhere.—
Dear Duff, I pr’ythee, contradict thyself,
And say it is not so.

 Enter Macbeth and Lennox with Ross.

MACBETH.
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had liv’d a blessed time; for, from this instant
There’s nothing serious in mortality.
All is but toys: renown and grace is dead;
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of.

 Enter Malcolm and Donalbain.

DONALBAIN.
What is amiss?

MACBETH.
You are, and do not know’t:
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopp’d; the very source of it is stopp’d.

MACDUFF.
Your royal father’s murder’d.

MALCOLM.
O, by whom?

LENNOX.
Those of his chamber, as it seem’d, had done’t:
Their hands and faces were all badg’d with blood;
So were their daggers, which, unwip’d, we found
Upon their pillows. They star’d, and were distracted;
No man’s life was to be trusted with them.

MACBETH.
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
That I did kill them.

MACDUFF.
Wherefore did you so?

MACBETH.
Who can be wise, amaz’d, temperate, and furious,
Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man:
Th’ expedition of my violent love
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
His silver skin lac’d with his golden blood;
And his gash’d stabs look’d like a breach in nature
For ruin’s wasteful entrance: there, the murderers,
Steep’d in the colours of their trade, their daggers
Unmannerly breech’d with gore. Who could refrain,
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
Courage to make’s love known?

LADY MACBETH.
Help me hence, ho!

MACDUFF.
Look to the lady.

MALCOLM.
Why do we hold our tongues,
That most may claim this argument for ours?

DONALBAIN.
What should be spoken here, where our fate,
Hid in an auger hole, may rush, and seize us?
Let’s away. Our tears are not yet brew’d.

MALCOLM.
Nor our strong sorrow
Upon the foot of motion.

BANQUO.
Look to the lady:—

 [_Lady Macbeth is carried out._]

And when we have our naked frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure, let us meet,
And question this most bloody piece of work
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us:
In the great hand of God I stand; and thence
Against the undivulg’d pretence I fight
Of treasonous malice.

MACDUFF.
And so do I.

ALL.
So all.

MACBETH.
Let’s briefly put on manly readiness,
And meet i’ th’ hall together.

ALL.
Well contented.

 [_Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain._]

MALCOLM.
What will you do? Let’s not consort with them:
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
Which the false man does easy. I’ll to England.

DONALBAIN.
To Ireland, I. Our separated fortune
Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are,
There’s daggers in men’s smiles: the near in blood,
The nearer bloody.

MALCOLM.
This murderous shaft that’s shot
Hath not yet lighted; and our safest way
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse;
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
But shift away. There’s warrant in that theft
Which steals itself, when there’s no mercy left.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same. Without the Castle.

 Enter Ross and an Old Man.

OLD MAN.
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
Hath trifled former knowings.

ROSS.
Ha, good father,
Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man’s act,
Threatens his bloody stage: by the clock ’tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp.
Is’t night’s predominance, or the day’s shame,
That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
When living light should kiss it?

OLD MAN.
’Tis unnatural,
Even like the deed that’s done. On Tuesday last,
A falcon, towering in her pride of place,
Was by a mousing owl hawk’d at and kill’d.

ROSS.
And Duncan’s horses (a thing most strange and certain)
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
Turn’d wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
Contending ’gainst obedience, as they would make
War with mankind.

OLD MAN.
’Tis said they eat each other.

ROSS.
They did so; to the amazement of mine eyes,
That look’d upon’t.
Here comes the good Macduff.

 Enter Macduff.

How goes the world, sir, now?

MACDUFF.
Why, see you not?

ROSS.
Is’t known who did this more than bloody deed?

MACDUFF.
Those that Macbeth hath slain.

ROSS.
Alas, the day!
What good could they pretend?

MACDUFF.
They were suborn’d.
Malcolm and Donalbain, the King’s two sons,
Are stol’n away and fled; which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.

ROSS.
’Gainst nature still:
Thriftless ambition, that will ravin up
Thine own life’s means!—Then ’tis most like
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.

MACDUFF.
He is already nam’d; and gone to Scone
To be invested.

ROSS.
Where is Duncan’s body?

MACDUFF.
Carried to Colmekill,
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
And guardian of their bones.

ROSS.
Will you to Scone?

MACDUFF.
No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.

ROSS.
Well, I will thither.

MACDUFF.
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu!
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!

ROSS.
Farewell, father.

OLD MAN.
God’s benison go with you; and with those
That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. Forres. A Room in the Palace.


 Enter Banquo.

BANQUO.
Thou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
As the Weird Women promis’d; and, I fear,
Thou play’dst most foully for’t; yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity;
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings. If there come truth from them
(As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And set me up in hope? But hush; no more.

 Sennet sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Macbeth as Queen; Lennox,
 Ross, Lords, and Attendants.

MACBETH.
Here’s our chief guest.

LADY MACBETH.
If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feast,
And all-thing unbecoming.

MACBETH.
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
And I’ll request your presence.

BANQUO.
Let your Highness
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
For ever knit.

MACBETH.
Ride you this afternoon?

BANQUO.
Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH.
We should have else desir’d your good advice
(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
In this day’s council; but we’ll take tomorrow.
Is’t far you ride?

BANQUO.
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
’Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night,
For a dark hour or twain.

MACBETH.
Fail not our feast.

BANQUO.
My lord, I will not.

MACBETH.
We hear our bloody cousins are bestow’d
In England and in Ireland; not confessing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu,
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?

BANQUO.
Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon’s.

MACBETH.
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot;
And so I do commend you to their backs.
Farewell.—

 [_Exit Banquo._]

Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night; to make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till supper time alone: while then, God be with you.

 [_Exeunt Lady Macbeth, Lords, &c._]

Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
Our pleasure?

SERVANT.
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.

MACBETH.
Bring them before us.

 [_Exit Servant._]

To be thus is nothing,
But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that which would be fear’d: ’tis much he dares;
And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
To act in safety. There is none but he
Whose being I do fear: and under him
My genius is rebuk’d; as, it is said,
Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
When first they put the name of king upon me,
And bade them speak to him; then, prophet-like,
They hail’d him father to a line of kings:
Upon my head they plac’d a fruitless crown,
And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
Thence to be wrench’d with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If’t be so,
For Banquo’s issue have I fil’d my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murder’d;
Put rancours in the vessel of my peace
Only for them; and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man,
To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!
Rather than so, come, fate, into the list,
And champion me to th’ utterance!—Who’s there?—

 Enter Servant with two Murderers.

Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

FIRST MURDERER.
It was, so please your Highness.

MACBETH.
Well then, now
Have you consider’d of my speeches? Know
That it was he, in the times past, which held you
So under fortune, which you thought had been
Our innocent self? This I made good to you
In our last conference, pass’d in probation with you
How you were borne in hand, how cross’d, the instruments,
Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
To half a soul and to a notion craz’d
Say, “Thus did Banquo.”

FIRST MURDERER.
You made it known to us.

MACBETH.
I did so; and went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
Your patience so predominant in your nature,
That you can let this go? Are you so gospell’d,
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
Whose heavy hand hath bow’d you to the grave,
And beggar’d yours forever?

FIRST MURDERER.
We are men, my liege.

MACBETH.
Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men;
As hounds, and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept
All by the name of dogs: the valu’d file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous nature
Hath in him clos’d; whereby he does receive
Particular addition, from the bill
That writes them all alike: and so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not i’ th’ worst rank of manhood, say’t;
And I will put that business in your bosoms,
Whose execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect.

SECOND MURDERER.
I am one, my liege,
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Hath so incens’d that I am reckless what
I do to spite the world.

FIRST MURDERER.
And I another,
So weary with disasters, tugg’d with fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it or be rid on’t.

MACBETH.
Both of you
Know Banquo was your enemy.

BOTH MURDERERS.
True, my lord.

MACBETH.
So is he mine; and in such bloody distance,
That every minute of his being thrusts
Against my near’st of life; and though I could
With barefac’d power sweep him from my sight,
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
Who I myself struck down: and thence it is
That I to your assistance do make love,
Masking the business from the common eye
For sundry weighty reasons.

SECOND MURDERER.
We shall, my lord,
Perform what you command us.

FIRST MURDERER.
Though our lives—

MACBETH.
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most,
I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ th’ time,
The moment on’t; for’t must be done tonight
And something from the palace; always thought
That I require a clearness. And with him
(To leave no rubs nor botches in the work)
Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.
I’ll come to you anon.

BOTH MURDERERS.
We are resolv’d, my lord.

MACBETH.
I’ll call upon you straight: abide within.

 [_Exeunt Murderers._]

It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight,
If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same. Another Room in the Palace.

 Enter Lady Macbeth and a Servant.

LADY MACBETH.
Is Banquo gone from court?

SERVANT.
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.

LADY MACBETH.
Say to the King, I would attend his leisure
For a few words.

SERVANT.
Madam, I will.

 [_Exit._]

LADY MACBETH.
Naught’s had, all’s spent,
Where our desire is got without content:
’Tis safer to be that which we destroy,
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

 Enter Macbeth.

How now, my lord, why do you keep alone,
Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Should be without regard: what’s done is done.

MACBETH.
We have scorch’d the snake, not kill’d it.
She’ll close, and be herself; whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint,
Both the worlds suffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible dreams
That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave;
After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well;
Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison,
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further.

LADY MACBETH.
Come on,
Gently my lord, sleek o’er your rugged looks;
Be bright and jovial among your guests tonight.

MACBETH.
So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you.
Let your remembrance apply to Banquo;
Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
Unsafe the while, that we
Must lave our honours in these flattering streams,
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Disguising what they are.

LADY MACBETH.
You must leave this.

MACBETH.
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
Thou know’st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.

LADY MACBETH.
But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.

MACBETH.
There’s comfort yet; they are assailable.
Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
His cloister’d flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons
The shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hums,
Hath rung night’s yawning peal, there shall be done
A deed of dreadful note.

LADY MACBETH.
What’s to be done?

MACBETH.
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale!—Light thickens; and the crow
Makes wing to th’ rooky wood.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whiles night’s black agents to their preys do rouse.
Thou marvell’st at my words: but hold thee still;
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
So, pr’ythee, go with me.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A Park or Lawn, with a gate leading to the Palace.

 Enter three Murderers.

FIRST MURDERER.
But who did bid thee join with us?

THIRD MURDERER.
Macbeth.

SECOND MURDERER.
He needs not our mistrust; since he delivers
Our offices and what we have to do
To the direction just.

FIRST MURDERER.
Then stand with us.
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveller apace,
To gain the timely inn; and near approaches
The subject of our watch.

THIRD MURDERER.
Hark! I hear horses.

BANQUO.
[_Within._] Give us a light there, ho!

SECOND MURDERER.
Then ’tis he; the rest
That are within the note of expectation
Already are i’ th’ court.

FIRST MURDERER.
His horses go about.

THIRD MURDERER.
Almost a mile; but he does usually,
So all men do, from hence to the palace gate
Make it their walk.

 Enter Banquo and Fleance with a torch.

SECOND MURDERER.
A light, a light!

THIRD MURDERER.
’Tis he.

FIRST MURDERER.
Stand to’t.

BANQUO.
It will be rain tonight.

FIRST MURDERER.
Let it come down.

 [_Assaults Banquo._]

BANQUO.
O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
Thou mayst revenge—O slave!

 [_Dies. Fleance escapes._]

THIRD MURDERER.
Who did strike out the light?

FIRST MURDERER.
Was’t not the way?

THIRD MURDERER.
There’s but one down: the son is fled.

SECOND MURDERER.
We have lost best half of our affair.

FIRST MURDERER.
Well, let’s away, and say how much is done.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. The same. A Room of state in the Palace.

 A banquet prepared. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth, Ross, Lennox, Lords
 and Attendants.

MACBETH.
You know your own degrees, sit down. At first
And last the hearty welcome.

LORDS.
Thanks to your Majesty.

MACBETH.
Ourself will mingle with society,
And play the humble host.
Our hostess keeps her state; but, in best time,
We will require her welcome.

LADY MACBETH.
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends;
For my heart speaks they are welcome.

 Enter first Murderer to the door.

MACBETH.
See, they encounter thee with their hearts’ thanks.
Both sides are even: here I’ll sit i’ th’ midst.

Be large in mirth; anon we’ll drink a measure
The table round. There’s blood upon thy face.

MURDERER.
’Tis Banquo’s then.

MACBETH.
’Tis better thee without than he within.
Is he dispatch’d?

MURDERER.
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.

MACBETH.
Thou art the best o’ th’ cut-throats;
Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance:
If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.

MURDERER.
Most royal sir,
Fleance is ’scap’d.

MACBETH.
Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect;
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
As broad and general as the casing air:
But now I am cabin’d, cribb’d, confin’d, bound in
To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo’s safe?

MURDERER.
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head;
The least a death to nature.

MACBETH.
Thanks for that.
There the grown serpent lies; the worm that’s fled
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
No teeth for th’ present.—Get thee gone; tomorrow
We’ll hear, ourselves, again.

 [_Exit Murderer._]

LADY MACBETH.
My royal lord,
You do not give the cheer: the feast is sold
That is not often vouch’d, while ’tis a-making,
’Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it.

 The Ghost of Banquo rises, and sits in Macbeth’s place.

MACBETH.
Sweet remembrancer!—
Now, good digestion wait on appetite,
And health on both!

LENNOX.
May’t please your Highness sit.

MACBETH.
Here had we now our country’s honour roof’d,
Were the grac’d person of our Banquo present;
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
Than pity for mischance!

ROSS.
His absence, sir,
Lays blame upon his promise. Please’t your Highness
To grace us with your royal company?

MACBETH.
The table’s full.

LENNOX.
Here is a place reserv’d, sir.

MACBETH.
Where?

LENNOX.
Here, my good lord. What is’t that moves your Highness?

MACBETH.
Which of you have done this?

LORDS.
What, my good lord?

MACBETH.
Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake
Thy gory locks at me.

ROSS.
Gentlemen, rise; his Highness is not well.

LADY MACBETH.
Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus,
And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat;
The fit is momentary; upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him,
You shall offend him, and extend his passion.
Feed, and regard him not.—Are you a man?

MACBETH.
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appal the devil.

LADY MACBETH.
O proper stuff!
This is the very painting of your fear:
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said,
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws, and starts
(Impostors to true fear), would well become
A woman’s story at a winter’s fire,
Authoris’d by her grandam. Shame itself!
Why do you make such faces? When all’s done,
You look but on a stool.

MACBETH.
Pr’ythee, see there!
Behold! look! lo! how say you?
Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.—
If charnel houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.

 [_Ghost disappears._]

LADY MACBETH.
What, quite unmann’d in folly?

MACBETH.
If I stand here, I saw him.

LADY MACBETH.
Fie, for shame!

MACBETH.
Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ th’ olden time,
Ere humane statute purg’d the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been perform’d
Too terrible for the ear: the time has been,
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end; but now they rise again,
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,
And push us from our stools. This is more strange
Than such a murder is.

LADY MACBETH.
My worthy lord,
Your noble friends do lack you.

MACBETH.
I do forget.—
Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, love and health to all;
Then I’ll sit down.—Give me some wine, fill full.—
I drink to the general joy o’ th’ whole table,
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss:
Would he were here.

 Ghost rises again.

To all, and him, we thirst,
And all to all.

LORDS.
Our duties, and the pledge.

MACBETH.
Avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee!
Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with!

LADY MACBETH.
Think of this, good peers,
But as a thing of custom: ’tis no other,
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

MACBETH.
What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The arm’d rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble: or be alive again,
And dare me to the desert with thy sword;
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mock’ry, hence!

 [_Ghost disappears._]

Why, so;—being gone,
I am a man again.—Pray you, sit still.

LADY MACBETH.
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting
With most admir’d disorder.

MACBETH.
Can such things be,
And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe,
When now I think you can behold such sights,
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
When mine are blanch’d with fear.

ROSS.
What sights, my lord?

LADY MACBETH.
I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse;
Question enrages him. At once, good night:—
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.

LENNOX.
Good night; and better health
Attend his Majesty!

LADY MACBETH.
A kind good night to all!

 [_Exeunt all Lords and Attendants._]

MACBETH.
It will have blood, they say, blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and trees to speak;
Augurs, and understood relations, have
By magot-pies, and choughs, and rooks, brought forth
The secret’st man of blood.—What is the night?

LADY MACBETH.
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

MACBETH.
How say’st thou, that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding?

LADY MACBETH.
Did you send to him, sir?

MACBETH.
I hear it by the way; but I will send.
There’s not a one of them but in his house
I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow
(And betimes I will) to the Weird Sisters:
More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good,
All causes shall give way: I am in blood
Stepp’d in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o’er.
Strange things I have in head, that will to hand,
Which must be acted ere they may be scann’d.

LADY MACBETH.
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.

MACBETH.
Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
We are yet but young in deed.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. The heath.

 Thunder. Enter the three Witches meeting Hecate.

FIRST WITCH.
Why, how now, Hecate? you look angerly.

HECATE.
Have I not reason, beldams as you are,
Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
To trade and traffic with Macbeth
In riddles and affairs of death;
And I, the mistress of your charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never call’d to bear my part,
Or show the glory of our art?
And, which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward son,
Spiteful and wrathful; who, as others do,
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now: get you gone,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me i’ th’ morning: thither he
Will come to know his destiny.
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Your charms, and everything beside.
I am for th’ air; this night I’ll spend
Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere noon.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap’rous drop profound;
I’ll catch it ere it come to ground:
And that, distill’d by magic sleights,
Shall raise such artificial sprites,
As, by the strength of their illusion,
Shall draw him on to his confusion.
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
His hopes ’bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
And you all know, security
Is mortals’ chiefest enemy.

 [_Music and song within, “Come away, come away” &c._]

Hark! I am call’d; my little spirit, see,
Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.

 [_Exit._]

FIRST WITCH.
Come, let’s make haste; she’ll soon be back again.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Forres. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Lennox and another Lord.

LENNOX.
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
Which can interpret farther: only, I say,
Thing’s have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth:—marry, he was dead:—
And the right valiant Banquo walk’d too late;
Whom, you may say, if’t please you, Fleance kill’d,
For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
To kill their gracious father? damned fact!
How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight,
In pious rage, the two delinquents tear
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too;
For ’twould have anger’d any heart alive,
To hear the men deny’t. So that, I say,
He has borne all things well: and I do think,
That had he Duncan’s sons under his key
(As, and’t please heaven, he shall not) they should find
What ’twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
But, peace!—for from broad words, and ’cause he fail’d
His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear,
Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?

LORD.
The son of Duncan,
From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,
Lives in the English court and is receiv’d
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
That the malevolence of fortune nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid
To wake Northumberland, and warlike Siward
That, by the help of these (with Him above
To ratify the work), we may again
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights;
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage, and receive free honours,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate the King that he
Prepares for some attempt of war.

LENNOX.
Sent he to Macduff?

LORD.
He did: and with an absolute “Sir, not I,”
The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
And hums, as who should say, “You’ll rue the time
That clogs me with this answer.”

LENNOX.
And that well might
Advise him to a caution, t’ hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England, and unfold
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering country
Under a hand accurs’d!

LORD.
I’ll send my prayers with him.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. A dark Cave. In the middle, a Cauldron Boiling.


 Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

FIRST WITCH.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew’d.

SECOND WITCH.
Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whin’d.

THIRD WITCH.
Harpier cries:—’Tis time, ’tis time.

FIRST WITCH.
Round about the cauldron go;
In the poison’d entrails throw.—
Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Swelter’d venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i’ th’ charmed pot!

ALL.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble.

SECOND WITCH.
Fillet of a fenny snake,
In the cauldron boil and bake;
Eye of newt, and toe of frog,
Wool of bat, and tongue of dog,
Adder’s fork, and blind-worm’s sting,
Lizard’s leg, and howlet’s wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

ALL.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble.

THIRD WITCH.
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witch’s mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravin’d salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digg’d i’ th’ dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew,
Gall of goat, and slips of yew
Sliver’d in the moon’s eclipse,
Nose of Turk, and Tartar’s lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-deliver’d by a drab,
Make the gruel thick and slab:
Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron,
For th’ ingredients of our cauldron.

ALL.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble.

SECOND WITCH.
Cool it with a baboon’s blood.
Then the charm is firm and good.

 Enter Hecate.

HECATE.
O, well done! I commend your pains,
And everyone shall share i’ th’ gains.
And now about the cauldron sing,
Like elves and fairies in a ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.

 [_Music and a song: “Black Spirits,” &c._]

 [_Exit Hecate._]

SECOND WITCH.
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
Open, locks,
Whoever knocks!

 Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags!
What is’t you do?

ALL.
A deed without a name.

MACBETH.
I conjure you, by that which you profess,
(Howe’er you come to know it) answer me:
Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
Against the churches; though the yesty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up;
Though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down;
Though castles topple on their warders’ heads;
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure
Of nature’s germens tumble all together,
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
To what I ask you.

FIRST WITCH.
Speak.

SECOND WITCH.
Demand.

THIRD WITCH.
We’ll answer.

FIRST WITCH.
Say, if thou’dst rather hear it from our mouths,
Or from our masters?

MACBETH.
Call ’em, let me see ’em.

FIRST WITCH.
Pour in sow’s blood, that hath eaten
Her nine farrow; grease that’s sweaten
From the murderer’s gibbet throw
Into the flame.

ALL.
Come, high or low;
Thyself and office deftly show!

 [_Thunder. An Apparition of an armed Head rises._]

MACBETH.
Tell me, thou unknown power,—

FIRST WITCH.
He knows thy thought:
Hear his speech, but say thou naught.

APPARITION.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff;
Beware the Thane of Fife.—Dismiss me.—Enough.

 [_Descends._]

MACBETH.
Whate’er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks;
Thou hast harp’d my fear aright.—But one word more.

FIRST WITCH.
He will not be commanded. Here’s another,
More potent than the first.

 [_Thunder. An Apparition of a bloody Child rises._]

APPARITION.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!

MACBETH.
Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.

APPARITION.
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn
The power of man, for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.

 [_Descends._]

MACBETH.
Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee?
But yet I’ll make assurance double sure,
And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live;
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of thunder.

 [_Thunder. An Apparition of a Child crowned, with a tree in his hand,
 rises._]

What is this,
That rises like the issue of a king,
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of sovereignty?

ALL.
Listen, but speak not to’t.

APPARITION.
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are:
Macbeth shall never vanquish’d be, until
Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill
Shall come against him.

 [_Descends._]

MACBETH.
That will never be:
Who can impress the forest; bid the tree
Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements, good!
Rebellious head, rise never till the wood
Of Birnam rise, and our high-plac’d Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
To time and mortal custom.—Yet my heart
Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
Can tell so much, shall Banquo’s issue ever
Reign in this kingdom?

ALL.
Seek to know no more.

MACBETH.
I will be satisfied: deny me this,
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.
Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?

 [_Hautboys._]

FIRST WITCH.
Show!

SECOND WITCH.
Show!

THIRD WITCH.
Show!

ALL.
Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;
Come like shadows, so depart!

 [_A show of eight kings appear, and pass over in order, the last with
 a glass in his hand; Banquo following._]

MACBETH.
Thou are too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!
Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs:—and thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
A third is like the former.—Filthy hags!
Why do you show me this?—A fourth!—Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom?
Another yet!—A seventh!—I’ll see no more:—
And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
Which shows me many more; and some I see
That twofold balls and treble sceptres carry.
Horrible sight!—Now I see ’tis true;
For the blood-bolter’d Banquo smiles upon me,
And points at them for his.—What! is this so?

FIRST WITCH.
Ay, sir, all this is so:—but why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?—
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites,
And show the best of our delights.
I’ll charm the air to give a sound,
While you perform your antic round;
That this great king may kindly say,
Our duties did his welcome pay.

 [_Music. The Witches dance, and vanish._]

MACBETH.
Where are they? Gone?—Let this pernicious hour
Stand aye accursed in the calendar!—
Come in, without there!

 Enter Lennox.

LENNOX.
What’s your Grace’s will?

MACBETH.
Saw you the Weird Sisters?

LENNOX.
No, my lord.

MACBETH.
Came they not by you?

LENNOX.
No, indeed, my lord.

MACBETH.
Infected be the air whereon they ride;
And damn’d all those that trust them!—I did hear
The galloping of horse: who was’t came by?

LENNOX.
’Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Macduff is fled to England.

MACBETH.
Fled to England!

LENNOX.
Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH.
Time, thou anticipat’st my dread exploits:
The flighty purpose never is o’ertook
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:
The castle of Macduff I will surprise;
Seize upon Fife; give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
This deed I’ll do before this purpose cool:
But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen?
Come, bring me where they are.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Fife. A Room in Macduff’s Castle.

 Enter Lady Macduff her Son and Ross.

LADY MACDUFF.
What had he done, to make him fly the land?

ROSS.
You must have patience, madam.

LADY MACDUFF.
He had none:
His flight was madness: when our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.

ROSS.
You know not
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.

LADY MACDUFF.
Wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion, and his titles, in a place
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not:
He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear, and nothing is the love;
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.

ROSS.
My dearest coz,
I pray you, school yourself: but, for your husband,
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o’ th’ season. I dare not speak much further:
But cruel are the times, when we are traitors,
And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumour
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Each way and move—I take my leave of you:
Shall not be long but I’ll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward
To what they were before.—My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you!

LADY MACDUFF.
Father’d he is, and yet he’s fatherless.

ROSS.
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:
I take my leave at once.

 [_Exit._]

LADY MACDUFF.
Sirrah, your father’s dead.
And what will you do now? How will you live?

SON.
As birds do, mother.

LADY MACDUFF.
What, with worms and flies?

SON.
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.

LADY MACDUFF.
Poor bird! thou’dst never fear the net nor lime,
The pit-fall nor the gin.

SON.
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
My father is not dead, for all your saying.

LADY MACDUFF.
Yes, he is dead: how wilt thou do for a father?

SON.
Nay, how will you do for a husband?

LADY MACDUFF.
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.

SON.
Then you’ll buy ’em to sell again.

LADY MACDUFF.
Thou speak’st with all thy wit;
And yet, i’ faith, with wit enough for thee.

SON.
Was my father a traitor, mother?

LADY MACDUFF.
Ay, that he was.

SON.
What is a traitor?

LADY MACDUFF.
Why, one that swears and lies.

SON.
And be all traitors that do so?

LADY MACDUFF.
Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.

SON.
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?

LADY MACDUFF.
Every one.

SON.
Who must hang them?

LADY MACDUFF.
Why, the honest men.

SON.
Then the liars and swearers are fools: for there are liars and swearers
enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.

LADY MACDUFF.
Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do for a father?

SON.
If he were dead, you’ld weep for him: if you would not, it were a good
sign that I should quickly have a new father.

LADY MACDUFF.
Poor prattler, how thou talk’st!

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
Though in your state of honour I am perfect.
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly:
If you will take a homely man’s advice,
Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.
To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage;
To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
I dare abide no longer.

 [_Exit._]

LADY MACDUFF.
Whither should I fly?
I have done no harm. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable; to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly:  why then, alas,
Do I put up that womanly defence,
To say I have done no harm? What are these faces?

 Enter Murderers.

FIRST MURDERER.
Where is your husband?

LADY MACDUFF.
I hope, in no place so unsanctified
Where such as thou mayst find him.

FIRST MURDERER.
He’s a traitor.

SON.
Thou liest, thou shag-ear’d villain!

FIRST MURDERER.
What, you egg!

 [_Stabbing him._]

Young fry of treachery!

SON.
He has kill’d me, mother:
Run away, I pray you!

 [_Dies. Exit Lady Macduff, crying “Murder!” and pursued by the
 Murderers._]

SCENE III. England. Before the King’s Palace.

 Enter Malcolm and Macduff.

MALCOLM.
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.

MACDUFF.
Let us rather
Hold fast the mortal sword, and, like good men,
Bestride our down-fall’n birthdom. Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry; new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yell’d out
Like syllable of dolour.

MALCOLM.
What I believe, I’ll wail;
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so, perchance.
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest: you have loved him well;
He hath not touch’d you yet. I am young; but something
You may deserve of him through me; and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
To appease an angry god.

MACDUFF.
I am not treacherous.

MALCOLM.
But Macbeth is.
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon.
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell:
Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
Yet grace must still look so.

MACDUFF.
I have lost my hopes.

MALCOLM.
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
Without leave-taking?—I pray you,
Let not my jealousies be your dishonours,
But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
Whatever I shall think.

MACDUFF.
Bleed, bleed, poor country!
Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee! wear thou thy wrongs;
The title is affeer’d.—Fare thee well, lord:
I would not be the villain that thou think’st
For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp
And the rich East to boot.

MALCOLM.
Be not offended:
I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think, withal,
There would be hands uplifted in my right;
And here, from gracious England, have I offer
Of goodly thousands: but, for all this,
When I shall tread upon the tyrant’s head,
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
By him that shall succeed.

MACDUFF.
What should he be?

MALCOLM.
It is myself I mean; in whom I know
All the particulars of vice so grafted
That, when they shall be open’d, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as snow; and the poor state
Esteem him as a lamb, being compar’d
With my confineless harms.

MACDUFF.
Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn’d
In evils to top Macbeth.

MALCOLM.
I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
That has a name: but there’s no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids, could not fill up
The cistern of my lust; and my desire
All continent impediments would o’erbear,
That did oppose my will: better Macbeth
Than such an one to reign.

MACDUFF.
Boundless intemperance
In nature is a tyranny; it hath been
Th’ untimely emptying of the happy throne,
And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours: you may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
And yet seem cold—the time you may so hoodwink.
We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
That vulture in you, to devour so many
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclin’d.

MALCOLM.
With this there grows
In my most ill-compos’d affection such
A staunchless avarice, that, were I king,
I should cut off the nobles for their lands;
Desire his jewels, and this other’s house:
And my more-having would be as a sauce
To make me hunger more; that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.

MACDUFF.
This avarice
Sticks deeper; grows with more pernicious root
Than summer-seeming lust; and it hath been
The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear;
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will,
Of your mere own. All these are portable,
With other graces weigh’d.

MALCOLM.
But I have none: the king-becoming graces,
As justice, verity, temp’rance, stableness,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no relish of them; but abound
In the division of each several crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.

MACDUFF.
O Scotland, Scotland!

MALCOLM.
If such a one be fit to govern, speak:
I am as I have spoken.

MACDUFF.
Fit to govern?
No, not to live.—O nation miserable,
With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter’d,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
By his own interdiction stands accus’d,
And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,
Oft’ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself
Have banish’d me from Scotland.—O my breast,
Thy hope ends here!

MALCOLM.
Macduff, this noble passion,
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconcil’d my thoughts
To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
From over-credulous haste: but God above
Deal between thee and me! for even now
I put myself to thy direction, and
Unspeak mine own detraction; here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myself,
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Unknown to woman; never was forsworn;
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own;
At no time broke my faith; would not betray
The devil to his fellow; and delight
No less in truth than life: my first false speaking
Was this upon myself. What I am truly,
Is thine and my poor country’s to command:
Whither, indeed, before thy here-approach,
Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men,
Already at a point, was setting forth.
Now we’ll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted quarrel. Why are you silent?

MACDUFF.
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
’Tis hard to reconcile.

 Enter a Doctor.

MALCOLM.
Well; more anon.—Comes the King forth, I pray you?

DOCTOR.
Ay, sir. There are a crew of wretched souls
That stay his cure: their malady convinces
The great assay of art; but at his touch,
Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand,
They presently amend.

MALCOLM.
I thank you, doctor.

 [_Exit Doctor._]

MACDUFF.
What’s the disease he means?

MALCOLM.
’Tis call’d the evil:
A most miraculous work in this good king;
Which often, since my here-remain in England,
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,
Himself best knows, but strangely-visited people,
All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of surgery, he cures;
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers: and ’tis spoken,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy;
And sundry blessings hang about his throne,
That speak him full of grace.

 Enter Ross.

MACDUFF.
See, who comes here?

MALCOLM.
My countryman; but yet I know him not.

MACDUFF.
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.

MALCOLM.
I know him now. Good God, betimes remove
The means that makes us strangers!

ROSS.
Sir, amen.

MACDUFF.
Stands Scotland where it did?

ROSS.
Alas, poor country,
Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
Be call’d our mother, but our grave, where nothing,
But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks, that rent the air,
Are made, not mark’d; where violent sorrow seems
A modern ecstasy. The dead man’s knell
Is there scarce ask’d for who; and good men’s lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they sicken.

MACDUFF.
O, relation
Too nice, and yet too true!

MALCOLM.
What’s the newest grief?

ROSS.
That of an hour’s age doth hiss the speaker;
Each minute teems a new one.

MACDUFF.
How does my wife?

ROSS.
Why, well.

MACDUFF.
And all my children?

ROSS.
Well too.

MACDUFF.
The tyrant has not batter’d at their peace?

ROSS.
No; they were well at peace when I did leave ’em.

MACDUFF.
Be not a niggard of your speech: how goes’t?

ROSS.
When I came hither to transport the tidings,
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour
Of many worthy fellows that were out;
Which was to my belief witness’d the rather,
For that I saw the tyrant’s power afoot.
Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland
Would create soldiers, make our women fight,
To doff their dire distresses.

MALCOLM.
Be’t their comfort
We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
An older and a better soldier none
That Christendom gives out.

ROSS.
Would I could answer
This comfort with the like! But I have words
That would be howl’d out in the desert air,
Where hearing should not latch them.

MACDUFF.
What concern they?
The general cause? or is it a fee-grief
Due to some single breast?

ROSS.
No mind that’s honest
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Pertains to you alone.

MACDUFF.
If it be mine,
Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.

ROSS.
Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.

MACDUFF.
Humh! I guess at it.

ROSS.
Your castle is surpris’d; your wife and babes
Savagely slaughter’d. To relate the manner
Were, on the quarry of these murder’d deer,
To add the death of you.

MALCOLM.
Merciful heaven!—
What, man! ne’er pull your hat upon your brows.
Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
Whispers the o’er-fraught heart, and bids it break.

MACDUFF.
My children too?

ROSS.
Wife, children, servants, all
That could be found.

MACDUFF.
And I must be from thence!
My wife kill’d too?

ROSS.
I have said.

MALCOLM.
Be comforted:
Let’s make us med’cines of our great revenge,
To cure this deadly grief.

MACDUFF.
He has no children.—All my pretty ones?
Did you say all?—O hell-kite!—All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop?

MALCOLM.
Dispute it like a man.

MACDUFF.
I shall do so;
But I must also feel it as a man:
I cannot but remember such things were,
That were most precious to me.—Did heaven look on,
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell slaughter on their souls: heaven rest them now!

MALCOLM.
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.

MACDUFF.
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes,
And braggart with my tongue!—But, gentle heavens,
Cut short all intermission; front to front,
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
Within my sword’s length set him; if he ’scape,
Heaven forgive him too!

MALCOLM.
This tune goes manly.
Come, go we to the King. Our power is ready;
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may;
The night is long that never finds the day.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.


 Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman.

DOCTOR.
I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your
report. When was it she last walked?

GENTLEWOMAN.
Since his Majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her
bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper,
fold it, write upon’t, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to
bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.

DOCTOR.
A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of
sleep, and do the effects of watching. In this slumbery agitation,
besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time,
have you heard her say?

GENTLEWOMAN.
That, sir, which I will not report after her.

DOCTOR.
You may to me; and ’tis most meet you should.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Neither to you nor anyone; having no witness to confirm my speech.

 Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper.

Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast
asleep. Observe her; stand close.

DOCTOR.
How came she by that light?

GENTLEWOMAN.
Why, it stood by her: she has light by her continually; ’tis her
command.

DOCTOR.
You see, her eyes are open.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Ay, but their sense are shut.

DOCTOR.
What is it she does now? Look how she rubs her hands.

GENTLEWOMAN.
It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands. I
have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.

LADY MACBETH.
Yet here’s a spot.

DOCTOR.
Hark, she speaks. I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my
remembrance the more strongly.

LADY MACBETH.
Out, damned spot! out, I say! One; two. Why, then ’tis time to do’t.
Hell is murky! Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we
fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? Yet who
would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?

DOCTOR.
Do you mark that?

LADY MACBETH.
The Thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now?—What, will these hands
ne’er be clean? No more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that: you mar all
with this starting.

DOCTOR.
Go to, go to. You have known what you should not.

GENTLEWOMAN.
She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that: heaven knows what
she has known.

LADY MACBETH.
Here’s the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will
not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!

DOCTOR.
What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.

GENTLEWOMAN.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole
body.

DOCTOR.
Well, well, well.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Pray God it be, sir.

DOCTOR.
This disease is beyond my practice: yet I have known those which have
walked in their sleep, who have died holily in their beds.

LADY MACBETH.
Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so pale. I tell you
yet again, Banquo’s buried; he cannot come out on’s grave.

DOCTOR.
Even so?

LADY MACBETH.
To bed, to bed. There’s knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come,
give me your hand. What’s done cannot be undone. To bed, to bed, to
bed.

 [_Exit._]

DOCTOR.
Will she go now to bed?

GENTLEWOMAN.
Directly.

DOCTOR.
Foul whisp’rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.—
God, God, forgive us all! Look after her;
Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night:
My mind she has mated, and amaz’d my sight.
I think, but dare not speak.

GENTLEWOMAN.
Good night, good doctor.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The Country near Dunsinane.

 Enter, with drum and colours Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Lennox and
 Soldiers.

MENTEITH.
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man.

ANGUS.
Near Birnam wood
Shall we well meet them. That way are they coming.

CAITHNESS.
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?

LENNOX.
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file
Of all the gentry: there is Siward’s son
And many unrough youths, that even now
Protest their first of manhood.

MENTEITH.
What does the tyrant?

CAITHNESS.
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
Some say he’s mad; others, that lesser hate him,
Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain,
He cannot buckle his distemper’d cause
Within the belt of rule.

ANGUS.
Now does he feel
His secret murders sticking on his hands;
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach;
Those he commands move only in command,
Nothing in love: now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant’s robe
Upon a dwarfish thief.

MENTEITH.
Who, then, shall blame
His pester’d senses to recoil and start,
When all that is within him does condemn
Itself for being there?

CAITHNESS.
Well, march we on,
To give obedience where ’tis truly ow’d:
Meet we the med’cine of the sickly weal;
And with him pour we, in our country’s purge,
Each drop of us.

LENNOX.
Or so much as it needs
To dew the sovereign flower, and drown the weeds.
Make we our march towards Birnam.

 [_Exeunt, marching._]

SCENE III. Dunsinane. A Room in the Castle.

 Enter Macbeth, Doctor and Attendants.

MACBETH.
Bring me no more reports; let them fly all:
Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane
I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm?
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
All mortal consequences have pronounc’d me thus:
“Fear not, Macbeth; no man that’s born of woman
Shall e’er have power upon thee.”—Then fly, false thanes,
And mingle with the English epicures:
The mind I sway by, and the heart I bear,
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

 Enter a Servant.

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-fac’d loon!
Where gott’st thou that goose look?

SERVANT.
There is ten thousand—

MACBETH.
Geese, villain?

SERVANT.
Soldiers, sir.

MACBETH.
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-liver’d boy. What soldiers, patch?
Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?

SERVANT.
The English force, so please you.

MACBETH.
Take thy face hence.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Seyton!—I am sick at heart,
When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push
Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
I have liv’d long enough: my way of life
Is fall’n into the sere, the yellow leaf;
And that which should accompany old age,
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have; but, in their stead,
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,
Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.
Seyton!—

 Enter Seyton.

SEYTON.
What’s your gracious pleasure?

MACBETH.
What news more?

SEYTON.
All is confirm’d, my lord, which was reported.

MACBETH.
I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack’d.
Give me my armour.

SEYTON.
’Tis not needed yet.

MACBETH.
I’ll put it on.
Send out more horses, skirr the country round;
Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour.—
How does your patient, doctor?

DOCTOR.
Not so sick, my lord,
As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies,
That keep her from her rest.

MACBETH.
Cure her of that:
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseas’d,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuff’d bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?

DOCTOR.
Therein the patient
Must minister to himself.

MACBETH.
Throw physic to the dogs, I’ll none of it.
Come, put mine armour on; give me my staff:
Seyton, send out.—Doctor, the Thanes fly from me.—
Come, sir, despatch.—If thou couldst, doctor, cast
The water of my land, find her disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
I would applaud thee to the very echo,
That should applaud again.—Pull’t off, I say.—
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug,
Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of them?

DOCTOR.
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation
Makes us hear something.

MACBETH.
Bring it after me.—
I will not be afraid of death and bane,
Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.

 [_Exeunt all except Doctor._]

DOCTOR.
Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Country near Dunsinane: a Wood in view.

 Enter, with drum and colours Malcolm, old Siward and his Son, Macduff,
 Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Lennox, Ross and Soldiers, marching.

MALCOLM.
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be safe.

MENTEITH.
We doubt it nothing.

SIWARD.
What wood is this before us?

MENTEITH.
The wood of Birnam.

MALCOLM.
Let every soldier hew him down a bough,
And bear’t before him. Thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our host, and make discovery
Err in report of us.

SOLDIERS.
It shall be done.

SIWARD.
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure
Our setting down before’t.

MALCOLM.
’Tis his main hope;
For where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
And none serve with him but constrained things,
Whose hearts are absent too.

MACDUFF.
Let our just censures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious soldiership.

SIWARD.
The time approaches,
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have, and what we owe.
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate;
Towards which advance the war.

 [_Exeunt, marching._]

SCENE V. Dunsinane. Within the castle.

 Enter with drum and colours, Macbeth, Seyton and Soldiers.

MACBETH.
Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
The cry is still, “They come!” Our castle’s strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie
Till famine and the ague eat them up.
Were they not forc’d with those that should be ours,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home.

 [_A cry of women within._]

What is that noise?

SEYTON.
It is the cry of women, my good lord.

 [_Exit._]

MACBETH.
I have almost forgot the taste of fears.
The time has been, my senses would have cool’d
To hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in’t. I have supp’d full with horrors;
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
Cannot once start me.

 Enter Seyton.

Wherefore was that cry?

SEYTON.
The Queen, my lord, is dead.

MACBETH.
She should have died hereafter.
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow; a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.

 Enter a Messenger.

Thou com’st to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.

MESSENGER.
Gracious my lord,
I should report that which I say I saw,
But know not how to do’t.

MACBETH.
Well, say, sir.

MESSENGER.
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
I look’d toward Birnam, and anon, methought,
The wood began to move.

MACBETH.
Liar, and slave!

MESSENGER.
Let me endure your wrath, if’t be not so.
Within this three mile may you see it coming;
I say, a moving grove.

MACBETH.
If thou speak’st false,
Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth,
I care not if thou dost for me as much.—
I pull in resolution; and begin
To doubt th’ equivocation of the fiend,
That lies like truth. “Fear not, till Birnam wood
Do come to Dunsinane;” and now a wood
Comes toward Dunsinane.—Arm, arm, and out!—
If this which he avouches does appear,
There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
I ’gin to be aweary of the sun,
And wish th’ estate o’ th’ world were now undone.—
Ring the alarum bell!—Blow, wind! come, wrack!
At least we’ll die with harness on our back.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. The same. A Plain before the Castle.

 Enter, with drum and colours, Malcolm, old Siward, Macduff and their
 Army, with boughs.

MALCOLM.
Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down,
And show like those you are.—You, worthy uncle,
Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we
Shall take upon’s what else remains to do,
According to our order.

SIWARD.
Fare you well.—
Do we but find the tyrant’s power tonight,
Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.

MACDUFF.
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. The same. Another part of the Plain.

 Alarums. Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,
But, bear-like I must fight the course.—What’s he
That was not born of woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.

 Enter young Siward.

YOUNG SIWARD.
What is thy name?

MACBETH.
Thou’lt be afraid to hear it.

YOUNG SIWARD.
No; though thou call’st thyself a hotter name
Than any is in hell.

MACBETH.
My name’s Macbeth.

YOUNG SIWARD.
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.

MACBETH.
No, nor more fearful.

YOUNG SIWARD.
Thou liest, abhorred tyrant. With my sword
I’ll prove the lie thou speak’st.

 [_They fight, and young Siward is slain._]

MACBETH.
Thou wast born of woman.
But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandish’d by man that’s of a woman born.

 [_Exit._]

 Alarums. Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF.
That way the noise is.—Tyrant, show thy face!
If thou be’st slain and with no stroke of mine,
My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still.
I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
Or else my sword, with an unbatter’d edge,
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune!
And more I beg not.

 [_Exit. Alarums._]

 Enter Malcolm and old Siward.

SIWARD.
This way, my lord;—the castle’s gently render’d:
The tyrant’s people on both sides do fight;
The noble thanes do bravely in the war,
The day almost itself professes yours,
And little is to do.

MALCOLM.
We have met with foes
That strike beside us.

SIWARD.
Enter, sir, the castle.

 [_Exeunt. Alarums._]

SCENE VIII. The same. Another part of the field.

 Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH.
Why should I play the Roman fool, and die
On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.

 Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF.
Turn, hell-hound, turn!

MACBETH.
Of all men else I have avoided thee:
But get thee back; my soul is too much charg’d
With blood of thine already.

MACDUFF.
I have no words;
My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out!

 [_They fight._]

MACBETH.
Thou losest labour:
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress, as make me bleed:
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
To one of woman born.

MACDUFF.
Despair thy charm;
And let the angel whom thou still hast serv’d
Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother’s womb
Untimely ripp’d.

MACBETH.
Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
For it hath cow’d my better part of man!
And be these juggling fiends no more believ’d,
That palter with us in a double sense;
That keep the word of promise to our ear,
And break it to our hope!—I’ll not fight with thee.

MACDUFF.
Then yield thee, coward,
And live to be the show and gaze o’ th’ time.
We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
“Here may you see the tyrant.”

MACBETH.
I will not yield,
To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet,
And to be baited with the rabble’s curse.
Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane,
And thou oppos’d, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
I throw my warlike shield: lay on, Macduff;
And damn’d be him that first cries, “Hold, enough!”

 [_Exeunt fighting. Alarums._]

 Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours, Malcolm, old Siward,
 Ross, Thanes and Soldiers.

MALCOLM.
I would the friends we miss were safe arriv’d.

SIWARD.
Some must go off; and yet, by these I see,
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

MALCOLM.
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.

ROSS.
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier’s debt:
He only liv’d but till he was a man;
The which no sooner had his prowess confirm’d
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he died.

SIWARD.
Then he is dead?

ROSS.
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
Must not be measur’d by his worth, for then
It hath no end.

SIWARD.
Had he his hurts before?

ROSS.
Ay, on the front.

SIWARD.
Why then, God’s soldier be he!
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death:
And so his knell is knoll’d.

MALCOLM.
He’s worth more sorrow,
And that I’ll spend for him.

SIWARD.
He’s worth no more.
They say he parted well and paid his score:
And so, God be with him!—Here comes newer comfort.

 Enter Macduff with Macbeth’s head.

MACDUFF.
Hail, King, for so thou art. Behold, where stands
Th’ usurper’s cursed head: the time is free.
I see thee compass’d with thy kingdom’s pearl,
That speak my salutation in their minds;
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine,—
Hail, King of Scotland!

ALL.
Hail, King of Scotland!

 [_Flourish._]

MALCOLM.
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves,
And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an honour nam’d. What’s more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,—
As calling home our exil’d friends abroad,
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny;
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher, and his fiend-like queen,
Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands
Took off her life;—this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place.
So thanks to all at once, and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crown’d at Scone.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]


